
S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for October 10th 2019.


S3: Great an unmatched wisdom edition that could be every edition of the gab fest in my view. There is only great and unmatched wisdom here. I am David Plotz of Atlas Obscura providing the great wisdom is John Dickerson of CBS is 60 minutes from New York.


S4: Hello John. Hi and providing the unmatched wisdom is Emily Bazelon of New York Times magazine and of Yale University Law School from New Haven. Hello Emily.


S5: Hello Pam. What kind of wisdom are you offering.


S6: None. I don’t have any wisdom. I’m like you know how in the Socratic dialogues are that the Dumbo who ask questions and that Socrates just kind of demolishes that’s me.


S7: That’s my role.


S6: Not who never his name is My name is like anaphylaxis anaphylaxis anaphylaxis shock.


S8: On today’s gabfest The president is obstructing the impeachment investigation will it cost him then the Supreme Court kicks off a big big term with one of the biggest gay and trans rights cases ever. We will discuss that then should Bernie Sanders end his campaign because he had a heart attack last week. Plus we will have cocktail chatter end my friends we have such good news to continue to announce about our conundrum live show so as we mentioned last week we’re doing our annual conundrum live show in Oakland California the Fox Theater on December 18th. You should go to Slate dot com slash live to get tickets and get more information again in Oakland on December 18th. And we also seek your conundrums. We can’t just manufacture all those amazing conundrums out of our out of our feverish little brains. We need your help. So if you have had a dilemma about fishes and trees about about the best way to spend a billion dollars about whatever it is you should tweet us with hashtag conundrum your conundrum or go to Slate dot com slash conundrum and there’s a special Google form you can fill out there and send us your conundrum. So Slate dot com slash conundrum or to do it by Twitter hashtag conundrum and send it to us at Slate gabfest. Also one more thing our friends at Future Tense have a new book. It’s an anthology of original science fiction about the future. It’s a great set of stories I have it at my bedside. I’ve been reading it. They are celebrating that anthology with a terrific series of free events in New York D.C. San Francisco and Phoenix. For example here in D.C. They’re going to be at the Smithsonian Arts and Industries Building cool building on the evening of October 20 seconds ago to Slate dot com slash live to get more information about that impeachment. Impeachment peacefully along this week. The most dramatic moment of the week. Well except for the incredible furor about the Syria President Trump’s portrayal of the Kurds in Syria which is also implicated in impeachment which we’ll talk about. But the most dramatic moment and probably the most important moment was at the last minute. The Trump administration barred EU ambassador Gordon Sunland who is central in all the Ukraine chicanery from testifying to the House of Representative and then issued a letter which was a blanket refusal to cooperate with the impeachment inquiry saying it was sort of improper. It was an improper abusive inquiry so Emily On what grounds is the administration refusing to cooperate. And how is that going to change the progress of impeachment is it. Are these grounds legitimate.


S5: It’s an amazing letter. I can’t find a lawyer who I respect who thinks it’s legitimate. The argument is that the president gets to decide whether an impeachment or inquiry by Congress a supposedly coequal branch of government is warranted or not. And the president thinks this one is coming out of partisan bias. And so he’s not participating in it. He has put a full halt on any cooperation with the impeachment inquiry. And so this is a kind of classic constitutional crisis in which you have not a completely clear set of instructions or at least not a detailed set of instructions in the Constitution and two branches clashing over what it means and how to proceed. And no real clear path forward.


S9: Emily you’re. It is quite true that the Constitution basically leaves it up to the House majority and how they want to structure impeachment but in the letter it says the president the sort of first point the first point in the second paragraph of the letter said that it denies the president the right to cross-examine witnesses. Now it doesn’t mean cross-examine the president wouldn’t do it himself. That presumably means the president’s lawyer the house never allows the president’s learn to cross-examine witnesses as far as I can tell.


S5: So I think this is a confusion about the different stages of impeachment. Right. So in the trial in the Senate then you could expect to be cross examining witnesses as the party you know under the under the gun so to speak. But in the house that’s not what an impeachment proceeding is. It’s more like the indictment or charging stage of a criminal case although of course it’s not a criminal case at all.


S10: Right.


S9: And so you’re being overly you you’re being overly generous when you say it’s a confusion because of course they know that they know that they’re that you don’t cross-examine witnesses in the House and that there’s a procedure here that’s been around for hundreds of years. And so it’s what that letter seems to do is say basically the House is not following the procedure and then misstating what the procedure is for the purposes of muddying the waters.


S5: Absolutely. I mean I think the letter is all about muddying the waters and making this a partisan political fight as opposed to giving any legitimacy to the very structure of the House’s proceedings. And politically speaking I see why Trump is choosing that path. It’s the path that he always chooses. It will work with his base. It’s not clear that senators Republican senators will object. I mean so far they’ve gone for basically everything he has wanted in this arena. And it raises this sort of trickiness of delay and what’s supposed to happen when so the Democrats could argue they already have a lot of evidence that Donald Trump should be impeached. But on the other hand they don’t want a rush. And so then if the proceedings continue along but they don’t yield any new exciting evidence because none is forthcoming from the White House then that could make the public think the case is kind of eroding over time. I think the Democrats are hoping they’ll be able to pull in some evidence from private citizens. There are a couple of administration officials or I should say government officials the former ambassador to the Ukraine Marie Ivanovich and Bill Taylor who worked on Ukraine issues for the State Department. They could quit their jobs and testify. You know maybe there are other people already in private life who will come forward and actually add something important. There’s the second whistleblower hovering out there. But I think that it’s just a political tactic on the president’s part that delay will help him.


S11: So Emily just to stay on this delay question or the blockage question what will happen with with this. How will the House will subpoena people. They will refuse to show for the subpoena. They will refuse to present documents.


S5: And then what will happen and then a Adam Schiff who is helping to run this inquiry for the Democrats will put together a detailed article of impeachment about obstruction of justice that lists all the unanswered requests and so from the point of view of impeaching trump all the noncooperation and the stonewalling will be held against him. And then again the question is how is that going to play. And I hate to be always framing it in those political rather than legal terms but this is a political process. We’re talking about and because it happens rarely. I mean John of course you’re right there are these established rules but I don’t think the public has or I don’t have a clear notion about like how everything is supposed to unfold in a way that would make it universal that what Trump is doing is totally out of bounds.


S8: So Emily this is not a case where the Supreme Court will have to ultimately decide whether the administration has to disgorge materials and present people to testify I or. Or is it the case where these are just two coequal branches of government Supreme Court to be like sorry that’s just not ours to deal with these these branches need to work it out themselves.


S5: Well that’s a huge question and I think there are two factors weighing into it. The first is whether the delay that it would take this case to go through the courts like for Congress to challenge Trump’s decision not to comply with the subpoenas that will get tied up in litigation just like the previous subpoenas from the House that the White House is not complying with are already tied up in litigation. It takes a long time for that all to work itself out in the courts. Again that delay I think would help Trump and I think the Democrats will wager that and then so maybe they don’t go to court at all because they don’t want to invite that kind of slow walking and then the other question is as you said what would the Supreme Court do. There is a really good op ed in The Times by Noah Feldman Law Professor Noah Feldman about this and he says and he says he’s just guessing and it’s I think it’s a good guess that you know we have really well established rules and law that the executive the president can challenge certain subpoenas as being too invasive. But there’s nothing that suggests you can just blanket say like I’m walking away from this I don’t want to participate in it. And so presumably the four liberal moderate justices would rule in that direction and then the question is what the five conservatives would do. They might take refuge in what you were just alluding to David this idea that when you have a clash between the executive and the legislature the judges stay out of it. They just say this is a political question we’re not going to decide it. It’s not our place and it’s possible there could be five votes for that position although no at the end of his op ed suggests he thinks that Chief Justice Roberts who’s very concerned about the court’s legitimacy would stick up for all of the law and precedent. On the other side. But as he says that’s just a guess and the Democrats particularly given the problem of delay may not want to take that risk.


S8: So John what do you what do you think this precedent of non-cooperation does for the functioning of government in the future. My own view is that it’s fairly devastating because we’re moving toward a model with pure executive power. It’s happening a few steps at a time. This is a huge step towards cutting the legislature’s power especially if the Supreme Court doesn’t step in as Emily suggests. They might not. They might have the chance or they might just sort of throw up their hands Well I think we’ve already.


S9: So yes there is what you say is right which is that you you end up having a situation where basically the ability of one branch to to do oversight to to check the power of the other which is the whole reason the shift system of shared powers was set up basically that that gets deleted and that that is the equipoise that was required to launch the entire American experiment.


S10: And so and the reason you did that the reason they did that is because they knew that the power of the presidency as circumscribed as they tried to make it was so great that they had to have something to get in the way between the ambition of a president which they knew every one of them even George Washington would have. And the further extension of that ambition. And to end use of power which they knew no president could resist because presidents were flawed humans. And that was so they set up an entire system to slow a president down and check a president. So if that’s gone that’s a big problem. But I think we don’t you don’t even have to get that far before you see the degradation of the institutions which is quite damaging. So you have Kevin McCarthy who’s the minority leader in the House a Republican in the House saying on on Fox News. Think about it if you went through a trial but you weren’t allowed to call any witnesses. That’s what Speaker Pelosi is doing to President Trump right now. So the minority leader of the house knows better. He knows what he knows how the House works. He knows how impeachment works. He knows better what he’s doing is despite knowing better about the institutional role and institutional rules of the body that he’s a member of. He’s basically burning all that and saying this is a rigged process and the president is being railroaded by a rigged process when he knows better. And so what he’s doing in that instance we’re not we don’t even have to get to the Supreme Court yet. He has special knowledge because he’s been entrusted with care of the institution is all members of the institution are entrusted with its care. And yet he’s saying basically these rules we operate by. He’s he’s denying that he knows them and then saying it’s a rigged system and that I think has costs because it basically says to anybody this system is is rigged and and and and illegitimate. There may be lots of other reasons it’s rigged. Legitimate but that’s not one of them. And so that again erodes the institutions that are required to adjudicate these things. The reason the institutions and structures exist is because conflict happens and you need a way to sort it so that you don’t you know resort to punching each other.


S12: And remember also we’re at this moment where impeachment is the possible remedy because we just went through a long period in which the idea of prosecuting the president in any sort of criminal way was taken off the table. Right. So it’s like you can’t prosecute me. I didn’t you know I mean Trump claims he didn’t commit any criminal violations of course but he also said you just can’t do that.


S13: And now they’re saying you can’t do impeachment.


S5: And then in her litigation in New York the state D.A. in Manhattan Cy Vance has been trying to get Trump’s tax returns in a investigation of the Trump organization in that case the government of the United States is saying that a state prosecutor cannot even investigate the president. So we’re talking about like total impunity here.


S7: Right. There is just no impunity.


S8: Yes. Just to to just say what Emily said. Maybe in a couple of different words. They’re saying in the state court they’re saying state courts prosecutors have no right to investigate the president because that is Congress’s job. And then they’re telling Congress you have no right to investigate investigate the president we will not cooperate with you at all. Prince nobody has the right to investigate the president. Right. So John what import is there in the fact that public support for impeachment and removal has risen significantly over the past few weeks. Does that really important to me. Can I also just put my finger on the scale here. It looks to me like all that’s happened is that the people who were all the people who are anti Trump have gone into the impeachment is good and the people who are supporting Trump basically are like don’t impeach. And it hasn’t fundamentally changed the political dynamics of the country.


S14: Well I don’t know. I mean when you have one poll that has 25 percent of Republicans saying that the impeachment inquiry is is valid. That’s a pretty high number. When you have sorting and partisanship of the way we have now I mean the president has nearly 90 90 percent support in his own party. So you’ve got some number of people who previously supported him and maybe even still support him who nevertheless think the impeachment inquiry is is worthwhile. That’s a shift. So what does that mean. The reason the polls are moving is it’s a relatively simple story. The president is the central player in it. People have things that they can view with their own eyes which is to say they can read the summary of the phone call. They can also hear that amazingly in parallel. People with distinguished records came to the exact same conclusion about what the administration was up to in terms of pressuring Ukraine to go look into this. And there is a kind of weakness in the defense of the president that’s been it’s shifted it’s moved around it’s moving the ball. And and no there’s been no clear kind of rebuttal.


S15: And when you have messy responses it kind of supports the underlying claim now is that putting any pressure on Republicans to move which is what needs to happen now it doesn’t appear to be. But I do think you have two things and I’ll briefly bring in Syria. The president basically abandoned the Kurds who were U.S. allies that were used to fight ISIS.


S8: And while some people might think that John and I didn’t help out at Normandy they didn’t help out in Normandy. So one day they were helping out in World War 2. They refused. What kind of allies are those guys.


S16: Well David’s referring to as the president was asked about the the Kurds and he said they didn’t help out at Normandy which is which I’ll get to in a second but let’s go back to there to get to.


S14: Well well whatever there is to get to whoever is running and listening to this has now stopped because they have no idea what we’re talking about. So going back to the president he abandons the Kurds. He he abandons the Kurds to the Turks who now go and attack them. I think this matters because you have somebody like Nikki Haley who a suburban Republican voter who might have not like Donald Trump but voted for them. They do like Nikki Haley and Nikki Haley tweets that the president has basically left our allies to die. That’s pretty strong language for Nikki. She’s right. Turkey invaded some people died. And this is so in other words these are these are people who have standing in the Republican Party who are saying that the president has made this awful terrible decision. That decision is very similar to Ukraine. He basically went outside of the structure did something basically unilaterally on his own and it’s caused all of these negative consequences in this case the negative consequences is people are dying people who were allies of the United States. So I think that’s a situation in where you see a disordered presidency creating bad real world consequences for basically the same thing which is a president who’s motivated by politics with little regard for political expertise or legal or I should say policy expertise legal boundaries or institutional restraints. When you combine those two things I do think you can see a situation where people say I either support from pitchman or they say you know four more years of this is not what we want.


S8: Emily do you think the Syria abandonment which has really infuriated certain conservatives and certain people the Republican Party and everybody else and a lot of other people too like a lot of other guys. Do you think that that is going to be a significant factor in the impeachment or or not. Do you think that’s just noise weekly noise.


S5: It’s definitely not just noise because people are dying. I think you know whether the Republican objections to it are sustained and whether they translate into any other deeper concerns about Trump being elected as re-elected as John just said like that I’m not sure about. But I think that this is the kind of spectacle that it has to have our attention because it’s just so upsetting.


S12: And you know one more thing about this it troubled me so much to hear Pompeo when he was asked about this on television give this completely not believable account that the president was taking our troops out of harm’s way when in fact the removal of our troops was done at the behest of Turkey to allow them to invade and then the last thing is I don’t understand this from the point of view is such a small force right. There are a thousand troops in this part of Syria holding the peace. It was only the removal of 50 troops that gave the green light to Turkey to invade.


S5: I mean if you’re talking even if you’re talking about a kind of permanent police force in this part of the world it seems like the benefits of stability of protecting ourselves against ISIS given that big prison nearby with 11000 ISIS captives in it not to mention the Kurds you know how we’re ever gonna get any allies to work with us again in this kind of circumstance like the whole thing is pretty breathtaking.


S8: It is astonishing there is so much rot in this administration I mean one is reminded of course that President Trump has huge business interests in Turkey that he cares about and so he has he’s got deep susceptibility to strong men like autobahn. So he just likes them. And so I’m sure Erdogan charmed him. But Trump also has business interests that are important to him. So he I’m sure wants Turkey to be on his side not on somebody else besides his his stupid hotel thrives. And so there’s that corruption. There’s this now this other story just coming back to Ukraine for a minute that Rick Perry the energy secretary was also trying to strong arm the government of Ukraine to stack a powerful Advisory Board in Ukraine that dealt deals with natural gas stock to stack that board with his cronies with political cronies who could do him favors and Giuliani may have been helping out with that as well. Also this other story about Giuliani kind of trying to get Rex Tillerson to pardon somebody who was violating Iran sanctions with a client of his. The amount of just sheer dag gum is just classic carrot blackmail corruption extortion favor doing. It’s astonishing with these people. It is just mind boggling how much there is acting like a mobster acting like like using the government as to advance their personal business interests corruptly. And it’s just breathtaking and shocking and and so sad if I can go back to a minute for a minute.


S9: On the on whether there is any pressure where the political pressure comes here it does. There are two other things that are it seemed to be a part of this when you talked about Normandy. David in that same press conference when the president was asked about his move and he said the Kurds didn’t help us in Normandy which is to say essentially you know they weren’t that helpful.


S15: You remember that that a big discussion about how to defeat ISIS revolved around getting essentially proxy forces to do the U.S. is work for it because of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq had had sapped the country’s interest in these kinds of things. Even Rand Paul was down with having the Kurds go after ISIS. And so this was the solution to the previous problem. So they’ve been the solution to the previous problem that are now being abandoned but in that same press conference the president basically said well the foreign fighters that are part of ISIS are going back to Europe and you know that’s their problem. And the foreign fighters that would go back as a result of this new condition in which Turkey is in control and the Kurds are under threat. And we should also mention by the way Turkey’s EU is a NATO ally which can make some larger complexity this issue but other NATO allies are in Europe and the president is basically saying well you know now they’ll have to deal with those with those foreign fighters. The previous strategy in Syria was actually to encircle the ISIS fighters because some of them were foreign European fighters in the U.S. because they work in concert with their allies were basically killing those guys before they went back to Europe because they know that if they go back to Europe they’ll not only hurt U.S. partners in Europe but they can get on planes and come to the United States. So that’s been thrown out the window. But the the attitude towards European allies in that press conference kicked U.S. allies in the shins which is the kind of behavior that takes place when you get into these disordered moments. And every Republican because they don’t challenge the president signs up for this now. So they’ve not just signed up for a variety of other things related to Ukraine or the Kurds but now they’ve signed up to basically having this casual attitude towards European allies which they don’t actually believe. And my point is that this is the kind of thing that makes it ever more difficult to be to be so supportive of the president. And yet nobody’s broken. One final very quick point is a smart listener of the show made the case that what is different with Ukraine is that it does provide an off ramp that that that perhaps Republicans could say I was with him until this moment and this is so particular that you know I’m not with him and that there’s something special in narratively clean about this that would allow that to happen. What about Syria.


S5: John does Syria also have that. Like if you for some reason don’t just you’re thinking politically and you’re a Republican in Washington maybe you don’t want to take impeachment but what about Syria.


S15: Yeah well I think you could but then then you have to build your larger case which is to say I’m distancing myself or I’m breaking for the president because he did something here that was so objectionable. The challenge though is whether is when somebody would say OK but how in that instance did he do anything that was I know the outcome is worse because actual human beings are dying. But everything that he did leading up to it which is to say blowing off his expertise acting impulsively blowing through the institutional restraints of the system he’s been doing that repeatedly throughout the administration and you’ve not said anything about that. So why now so then that’s been that’s been a kind of constraint on anybody breaking from the president. As I understand it from conversations with them up to this point.


S9: But I think you do have something different here because of. Because you do you are going to have pictures of people actually dying as a result of the president’s policies.


S7: All right. I want to wrap this up with an amazing no.


S17: An amazing little thing I just saw. It’s just too rich to not let let too rich to let go by which is the following sentence was just spoken by a senior White House official Hunter Biden the son of Joe Biden accepted a job for which he had absolutely no qualifications. It was an outrageous abuse of power by his father and should be treated as such. Who said that.


S6: VON TRAPP just said that oh my god there is no bottom. There is no bottom. Slate Plus members you get bonus segments on the Gabfest and other Slate podcasts.


S8: This week we’re going to talk about the NBA is China face off over free speech. Got a sitcom flush gabfest plus to become a member today the first Monday in October a red letter day on the bath lawn calendar arrive this week. Emily what are the big cases the Supreme Court is going to consider this term. Which are you most excited about. And then we’ll get to the big argument that already happened.


S13: I don’t know if I’m excited about anything I’m more sort of living in Redding in terror. Exactly.


S18: There are so many big cases I am going to leave some out there are crucial cases about the dreamers and other aspects of immigration law coming up. There is an abortion case which hasn’t been scheduled yet but will be heard at some point this spring. We’re about to talk about this big case involving whether it’s legal to fire LGBT people at work that had super interesting argument this week. And that’s like only scratching the surface. Oh there is a big. The first guns rights case in nine years is going to come up in the beginning of December. I mean it’s really a term in which the court is already hitting some of the most contested areas of American life and this is before we know that the court will be weighing in on some aspect of presidential power which you know is still possible.


S8: So let’s go to the case they’ve already heard they heard argument this week on three conjoined cases involving whether the 1964 statute barring sex discrimination effectively also bars discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity. So two cases involving gay employees who were fired essentially for being gay and one involving a trans employee who was fired after announcing their sexual identity. So what are the issues at play in this case and why is it okay. I mean I think one question that a lot of people have is homosexuality was illegal in 1964 across most the U.S. and certainly wasn’t contemplated in the statute itself. So why would it be OK for for that to be added or implicit in the statute even though it was clearly not something the Congress contemplated at the time.


S18: Yeah. So when Congress passed the Civil Rights Act and Title 7 of the Civil Rights Act which addresses employment in 1964 Congress banned discrimination on the basis of sex and in some areas of law for the most part we’ve assumed that discriminating against someone on the basis of their sexual orientation is different than discrimination on the basis of sex. But what these cases do is they kind of go back to the language and they say well wait a second one’s sex one’s classification is male or female are essential to these discrimination suits because if you’re a man who loves other men well then you are being discriminated against because your sexual orientation goes back to your sex right. Like those two things are kind of tied together. There is some law supporting this. There is a decision from the 1990s in which Justice Scalia you know one of the court’s arch conservatives said that a man who was being basically like harassed and bullied for being gay could sue under Title 7 on the basis of sex discrimination. So that’s one case that kind of begins to lead in this direction. And then when you’re thinking about trans people and trans identity it seems I think more intuitive that it’s their sexual identity that’s at stake. And there is decades of law protecting trans people from discrimination under Title 7. So with regard to that lawsuit if the Supreme Court said Oh it’s fine to fire people under Title 7 if they are trans that would actually be a real shift in the legal thinking. So I mean these are really interesting questions of how we think about one’s biological sex vs. one’s sexual preferences. But you can see that if you’re looking at the words on the page which is something that some of the courts justices including the Al Gore caustic its newest member.


S16: That’s what Gore such says his method is if you’re thinking about that then this idea that like oh Congress didn’t have this in mind in 1964 starts to seem less important is that the grounds on which somebody like Gore such would build their response that it just isn’t that the language justice isn’t in there and then that’s the protection doesn’t exist.


S13: Now of course Hatch thinks the language is the in there. He’s the opposite. Yes sorry. Yeah he’s there. No no it’s fine. You were just giving voice to the view of Justice Alito who doesn’t have like a strict method that he follows and Alito basically said at the oral argument basically like this is absurd.


S19: Congress wasn’t thinking about protecting people from being fired on the basis of sexual orientation when they wrote Title 7. So what are we doing here. And it was Kagan who said well wait a second are normal method of statutory interpretation is to look at the text and then gorse which had this for me fascinating moment where he said OK to the plaintiff’s lawyer. OK. So assume I’m with you on the textual list matter. Well now I want you to think about the quote massive social upheaval that would arise if we did what you wanted and whether Congress didn’t have wasn’t thinking about that in 1964. And so for reasons of judicial modesty we should not rule in your behalf. And so. OK. Go ahead.


S14: Well as you say but then but if Congress was making decisions on protecting women that’s a pretty I mean that’s a pretty big portion of the population that it’s making a decision about so its goals weren’t modest.


S12: Good point. And also there is no massive social upheaval like literally what was you talking about. Right and saddle.


S4: Yeah. Oh sorry. No I’m just going to. I just wanted to align myself with you that I. I cannot stand that argument that there is going to be this huge social upheaval if trans people are not going to be fired for being trans or gay people are not to be fired for being gay. It’s ridiculous. Or that or that you know suddenly this total mythology this canard that every bathroom is going to be overrun. It’s like no one’s gonna know what bathroom to go to when they’re going to be predators in every bathroom. It’s just complete errant nonsense.


S12: And there was a lot of questions about that. No you’re right.


S19: But also even more basically the lawyer gorse which was addressing in that moment was the lawyer for the transgender plaintiff who has had the law on their side for like 20 years. And so the lawyer for the plaintiff said that he said well for 20 years federal courts of appeals have been finding and just the way you’re worrying about and there’s been no upheaval. And then gorse which basically said Well are you going to address these arguments like as if he hadn’t answered the question. And then the lawyer said well.


S20: But I did answer anyway so when Gore suggests the question of somebody who’s got the best answer in the room is he in that instance I mean tell me about how the ball bounces in these public arguments these he creating essentially a fact record by asking this question of the lawyer representing the trans side in order to basically get it on record that there is a fine rebuttal to that question of social upheaval.


S21: I mean that’s a good question. It was hard to tell what his motivation was and he can look into the briefs for material you know that provides evidence for what he wants to argue.


S19: He can also go outside the briefs if he wants it’s all like a hard and fast rule that he has to stay within those confines. I think what was telling about this moment is what David was getting at which is that you know look in polls most Americans say that they already think it’s illegal to fire gay and trans people for being gay or trans in some states. It is indeed illegal. We just don’t have and we haven’t until now had an interpretation of national law that provides those protections. And you know one answer to all this is like well it’s Congress’s job to fix to fix this problem. And that is one clean answer right. I mean Congress could go ahead and pass the statute. There has been a statute that’s been proposed but that hasn’t happened so far. And so you know this is one of many instances in which we’re harking back to laws of an earlier era and asking or some people are asking courts to reinterpret them essentially because Congress doesn’t make laws anymore.


S8: Right. But that’s a really interesting question because the court is not wrong as it wasn’t. When you think about the the marriage equality cases there were there was a very reasonable argument to say this is something that should be you know that legislators let’s legislatures should decide and that the court weighed in.


S17: But the court weighed in basically because the Congress is incapable of doing its job now. But is the court obliged to consider the fact that Congress is incapable of doing this job when it is at work or or should it not consider that.


S21: Yeah I don’t know. I mean I think that’s a really deep question like the same sex marriage cases one could argue that what’s been happening is that a few federal appeals courts around the country have been finding the title 7 does indeed contain this protection.


S19: And like the sky didn’t fall. Right. I mean this is also what we saw with the marriage equality that you know the early ruling the first ruling was from the Supreme Court in Massachusetts providing for marriage equality and people thought at the time like there’s gonna be a huge backlash to this it’s really dangerous. And that didn’t happen. And then that made it easier for other courts to follow along. And so you’re not having a kind of sudden declaration from the Supreme Court about a kind of area of law in which we don’t have any evidence or there have been no lower court decisions. But you could also say well that’s lovely. But it’s all within the judicial branch. And really we do want legislators to be the ones making these decisions.


S21: And indeed in some states legislators have acted right. The question is what we do about the states where they haven’t.


S17: Look let’s change to a couple of the other cases Emily so of the other big cases that seem contentious Louisiana abortion case does seem to be really important because it’s essentially the exactly the same case that the court considers just three years ago when it involved the state of Texas. And in that case the Supreme Court with Justice Kennedy siding with the majority threw out a Texas law that would have really constrained abortion throughout Texas by requiring doctors to get admitting privileges in local hospitals which it’s very hard for them to get abortion providers to get that because because hospitals in the state makes it hard for them to get it. And now Louisiana has the same essentially the same law. And it seems to me that that this is going to they’re going to just reverse themselves. Right.


S18: Well I mean we’ll see. But what you said is all true. The only thing that has changed between this ruling in 2016 striking down the law in Texas and now is the composition of the court. And so it is a kind of classic test of how much justices respect precedent right past decisions. There is no hard and fast rule about this. You know we have this idea called starry decisis from the Latin. That in general it’s good to respect previous decisions of the court because that helps the law be stable and people rely on law and like that’s kind of generally how it should go. But we all agree that it’s good that like the court you know reverse Plessy versus Ferguson which provided for separate but equal facilities. That was a really bad decision that we were absolutely right to get rid of. And so because there isn’t a hard and fast rule about when to respect precedent justices can make up their own minds. And I think for the conservatives on the court who it’s clear oppose abortion the question is what do you do about this 2016 precedent which let’s be clear is hugely important. I mean what’s at stake here is whether most clinics in the state close or stay open in Louisiana. They’re already only three clinics two of the three would close if this law is allowed to go into effect.


S17: Emily one of the questions would you not do that earlier. Just to just to close out this segment. How concerned do you think this court is about legitimacy. Because it is it is moving very far to the right and away from where public opinion is not necessarily away from where the where Congress is or where the president is but away from where public opinion is. How how much does that matter to these justices do you think.


S19: I think it matters a great deal to Chief Justice John Roberts. It’s pretty paramount for him. I mean one thing you can say about the last several years on the court is that in the end in June on those last days when everybody is paying attention or at least more people are paying attention it always feels like there’s something for everyone. Right. So yes you know the court does something that Republicans cheer. But there’s also a case in the last term it was the census case where liberals feel like OK there is some limit some way that you know are what’s important our values are also still being expressed by this court. And I think that Roberts is going to continue to look for those opportunities and that he wants the court to thread a needle. It is not at all clear that the other four conservatives share that deep commitment. They have a lot of things they want to do and some of them seem like they’re in a big rush. I think for the court’s liberal moderates it the the main task is to try to peel off different conservative justices by making appeals that seem like they’re really well suited for those particular justices.


S8: I think that’s what you saw Kagan do this week in the LGBT case with Korsak and you can look for lots more of that to come Bernie Sanders had a heart attack last week and had two stents installed to allow blood to flow through key arteries around his heart. Sanders is 78 years old but he’d been keeping up a ferocious schedule for rallies a day and he has had a lifetime of reasonable of rude good health. In fact he’s out of the hospital. He just spent a million million plus on a TV ad buy also raised twenty five million dollars in the third quarter. So his campaign had been active he had been sinking a little bit in the polls but he’d been extremely active campaigner. So John My view is his campaign is over the only question is whether he decides to walk away or to lose in caucuses and primaries. Is that correct.


S14: I mean he has other challenges and we had other challenges before he had a health challenge.


S22: So which included pre stand question questions or kind of middling concerns about his age.


S20: So it’s kind of hard to take this one. One thing out but for a candidate who was facing pressure from Elizabeth Warren you know it and then also had to just navigate the challenge that that the larger Democratic Party voters are not all as liberal as Bernie Sanders. Those were two big big problems before this. So I this you know obviously doesn’t doesn’t help and so I think his chances were we’re narrowing before it happened and I think they’ve narrowed more but there is a big thing which is that there are Bernie Sanders supporters are really locked in in a way that you don’t see with other candidates and so I think he sticks around and also he’s been such an effective message candidate in terms of changing the shape of the Democratic Party and the conversation that he can still have a part to play that will be significant in shaping who the ultimate nominee is whether he wins whether he stays or whether he wins or not.


S8: Emily do you think you should stop his campaign.


S21: I don’t think he has to stop his campaign. I mean Bernie has been such an effective messenger for what he wants to say.


S19: I feel like he’s he is really important in stating these matters of principle and kind of sharpening the arguments that Democrats have to contend with. You know I don’t always think it’s like helpful to them politically I think he has pulled them or they have allowed themselves to be pulled too far to the left on Medicare for all. But I think he really stands for something and he can have a heart attack and just keep going.


S8: I mean what John said about his role shaping the campaign just seems to me like the obvious and in a good way obvious and legitimate in a way that this is almost I mean not for Bernie Sanders but for the Democrats almost the best of all possible situations which is that he still gets to be kind of this mascot figure. Everyone knows now that he’s not actually going to get the nomination. So they don’t have to worry too much about that. So they can you can you can treat his kids supporters with dignity and respect and hope to winning them over. There’s no need to alienate him. No need to alienate them. You need to fight too hard against him because he just doesn’t have a chance. And so you you keep the Sanders supporters in the fold you butter them up to kind of come to whoever the eventual nominee is and yet not worry about him too much. Do you think that the Sanders heart attack is really bad news for Biden who is similarly old has a little bit of a kind of slightly out of it old timer quality.


S23: I don’t think that the Bernie’s heart attack like slaps on top.


S19: BIDEN I mean Biden is has been having his own challenges and figuring out how to respond to the attacks on him and Hunter Biden whose son from Donald Trump. And I think he was not particularly forceful in the beginning and now is like trying to be clear and talking about it more and you know called for impeachment but also I think his like risen to a more full throated defense of himself and his family. So I think he’s got challenges but don’t feel like Bernie’s heart attack is his problem. John what do you think.


S15: Yeah I think I think he’s got bigger problems which is the problem which is that people might decide at some point in the Democratic Party. You know Donald Trump shouldn’t have done what he did in the Ukrainian phone call and Donald Trump is bad in all these different ways. But it also just wasn’t great that Hunter Biden was getting paid an incredible amount of money for five years and something that just doesn’t smell right either. They can. Those two point those two views can be in the same person’s mind and that that won’t that won’t be great for Joe Biden.


S8: I’m going to say something which is super age just now so prepare your prepare your hateful tweets people. I don’t think anyone should get a new job at age 78. I think it’s too old to get a new job. I’m not saying that people shouldn’t work at 78 or they shouldn’t get a new super demanding job at age 78. I just don’t think I’m 49. I’m not sure I should get a new demanding job.


S7: So I don’t I don’t believe that about 49 year olds. By the way. OK. But I do think at 78 that it’s that that’s really that’s it’s hard to start a whole new incredibly demanding job.


S8: People’s mental acuity isn’t there there their flexibility isn’t quite as they are their physical health isn’t there it’s just it’s it’s hard.


S15: So you can make that argument without being a just which is that by the time you gain that much variance in life you are succeeding because you have you have a kind of wisdom and pattern recognition that all of your previous experience. It serves you really well you make decisions because you kind of know how the world works. But then when you get into the job of the presidency you can argue the job is actually not following your previous patterns.


S16: It’s actually unlearning a lot of your previous patterns and having the adaptability and mobility to learn those new patterns and figure out those new ways which can be. You could imagine actually a person with a supple kind of mind being a better able to do that at an older age than a younger I guess or I guess my point is that the blindness of your own experience can blind you at age 50 as well as age 75 but since you’ve got more experience at 75 you might it might be the case that more people are blinded and it has nothing to do with actual physicality but more the accumulation of experience which isn’t to say that experience isn’t important but it has this other quality that people don’t think about.


S4: There John said it in the non hateful smart way.


S23: Yes.


S8: He was very gracious and diplomatic but I kind of think he essentially agreed with you let us go to cocktail chatter when you’re having a delicious delicious martini I would be having. I will be having my cocktail. What will you be chattering about.


S21: Emily Bazelon I am watching with great interest the race for district attorney in San Francisco.


S7: So you’re about to about a TV show. I knew it wasn’t a great TV show slated for a new TV show. Yeah but I go ahead. All right fine.


S19: I’m working on that. But let’s go with this one for now. So as listeners know I am obsessed with the district attorney races I’d be interested in this race merely for that reason but it’s got other things going for it. One of the candidates chose a Boudin is a former student and friend of mine.


S18: My sister Laura is also working on his campaign and something might have untoward happened in this race last week which was that the current district attorney stepped down nearly three weeks early and then the mayor of San Francisco London Breed appointed the district attorney. Susie Loftus one of the candidates who was Chase’s main opponent yeah. So that right so that Loftis could run as an incumbent and this was after polls showing that Loftis his big problem was that she didn’t have enough name recognition in the city. So now she’s gonna be running as the interim D.A.. And it’s just like a total political machine kind of move that I hope backfires not just because I think she’s a would be terrific in this job. And it will be really interesting to watch the city if that happened but also because this is just like an anti-democratic like crappy thing to do. So if you live in San Francisco pay attention to this race. I’m sure turnout will be low since there is not much else on the ballot. But this is the kind of shenanigans that really should not be rewarded or let let slide and the election is in the beginning of November.


S16: John Dickerson what’s your chatter David ionic is the only district attorney of San Francisco that I recognize.


S15: My chatter is about a gem of a little book called metropolitan stories and it’s a novel written by a friend of mine someone I’ve known for a very long time and her name’s Christine Colson and it’s about the Metropolitan Museum and the objects in it from the perspective of those objects well lots of different perspectives but about that but partially from the objects and it is it’s delightful and transporting and surprising.


S14: And so if you’d like. Well if you like reading but also if you if you’ve ever been to the Met. But even if you just have been it’s just like it’s got a lot going on anyway so I recommend it.


S8: Man this is log rolling central this week I’m going to log roll to and my chatter This is super duper log rolling. Some of you may remember Atlas Obscura a couple of years ago put out a book called Atlas Obscura and explorers guide the world’s hidden wonders was a huge bestseller. I hope many of you have it I hope many of you gave it as gifts and I’m thrilled to say that this week we are putting out a second edition of that book. It is updated with 100 new places like the Irish sky garden the world’s largest beaver dam the boiling river which is this river which literally is boiling it so hot. The Milky seas the FBI spy House pre continent to which is this crazy Jacques Cousteau place the harp space gone this gigantic gun that was supposed to shoot things into outer space which is on a beach in the Caribbean the world’s largest conveyor belt.


S11: The museum devoted to a single tooth of the Buddha. It is a just a collection of the world’s most amazing places and there are pull out maps there’s a calendar of world festivals or city guides. It is a magnificent book it is the best present you could give this holiday season to anybody. I assure you anybody you know who likes to travel it will love this. It is just it’s a totally inspirational. The book is beautiful. You should definitely get it. It’s Atlas Obscura. The second edition. It’s got a beautiful red cover. I swear to you you will not be disappointed if you get it. It’s it’s it’s it’s just a wonderful wonderful book. And I mean you know I’m obviously I have a vested interest in it but I believe this wholeheartedly. And I’m sure Emily and John can affirm that having seen that book at their houses.


S5: So it’s awesome. I love it.


S15: My daughter took it. So I haven’t actually seen it but the fact that she that she has not let go of it is a sign of what you say being true.


S8: Yes. Kids love it. To their listener chatters this week. It is. It is slightly daunting. Every week I have to go through these listener letters that they’re so good they take up huge amount of my time because they’re so good. There are so many interesting stories. And it’s really hard to choose. So thank you. Please keep tweeting your your chatters to us. That’s like efforts because they’re so good. This week Matthew Zito at at Matthew Zito points me to a a Twitter thread from Ben marrow and it’s about a paper that was presented by some economists at a political economy a finance conference in Chicago this weekend and it’s about how fluctuations in the international price of silver can predict the probability of terrorist attacks. That sounds crazy like how could the price of silver predict terrorist attacks. It’s amazing. I don’t want to give too much away but it has to do with rules about Islamic charity how these rules apply to Sunni families in Pakistan but not Shia families in Pakistan and taxation rates in Pakistan and how that you then see a totally distinct pattern of terrorist attacks resulting from fluctuations in the price of silver. It is fascinating and bizarre and you know it’s almost like a magic trick when you read through this Twitter thread you’re like whoa that how did that happen. And then you end up persuaded. So please check it out. Gabfest fans before we go I want to tell you some exciting news today. Slate is launching an important new initiative to examine one of the most essential questions of our time. The question is who counts over the next 13 months.


S4: Slate will investigate who counts in the voting booth who counts as an American who’s money counts and the democratic process and who’s doesn’t. Slate will cover stories of Americans whose voices have been silenced. Stories of votes diluted and stories about where power has been chopped down and Slate wants to hear from you. What else should we cover. Share what’s happening in your community by e-mailing who counts. At Slate dot com. And you can strengthen the series with your financial support too.


S3: To learn more about this project and how to support it please go to Slate dot com slash who counts that is our show for today the efforts it’s produced by Jocelyn Frank our researcher is the amazing Bridget Dunlap music Caplin engineered here in D.C. Ryan McEvoy I think in New Haven and Chris Buckley and CBS helped John today you should follow us on Twitter at Slate gabfest. Tweet conundrum to us at Slate get fest using hashtag conundrum and please join us for our annual conundrum show on December 18 in Oakland at the Fox Theatre. Go to slate that council’s live. For tickets for Emily Bazelon and John Dickerson.


S24: I’m David Plotz. Thank you for listening. We will talk to you next.


S25: Hello Slate Plus how are you really. That’s how you are. That’s good. Okay. Here.


S8: So Daryl Morey the GM of the Houston Rockets tweeted support last week for Hong Kong protesters and that outraged people in China. So the Houston Rockets NBA team they have a rich partnership with the CBA the Chinese Basketball Association in part because the president of the CBA is Yao Ming who is once a star for the rockets and that those two teams that that team in that league are well aligned. But the NBA in general has an enormous and growing presence in China very very successful basketball is hugely popular in China growing popular it’s growing there is a whole series of events slated for this week with preseason games being played in China. Some basketball facilities that were sponsored by the NBA being opened and as a result of Mori’s tweet which which was this kind of anodyne tweet but supportive of Hong Kong protesters the preseason games were taken off Chinese television. The camp that was supposed to open was not opened and the NBA has responded in this kind of interesting way where at first they were they appeared to be heavy appeasing and apologizing for Mori’s tweet and then quickly moved into more of a you know Mori Mori has free expression and that’s what our employees and our our people who work at the NBA have the right to express themselves. And on personal matters and that’s not the NBA endorsing what he’s saying but it’s very much endorsing the idea that is he has a right to express himself. And Adam Silver who is in China who’s on his way to China the NBA commissioner I think took a pretty brave stand here. But let’s talk about it because currently the NBA is getting battered from both left and right for being for not not being harsh enough towards China and the people are saying they should pull out of China until the Chinese apologize and then others are saying well actually affect people in China are saying no the NBA hasn’t done nearly enough. So John this is not the first company the NBA is not the first American company to or non Chinese company to run into trouble. You have the gap given on Xi Tiffany. There’s a video game company Activision Blizzard which this week took away prize money from somebody who had won a videogame tournament because that person expressed support for Hong Kong protesters. And there’s a whole category of things the Chinese do not want companies that do business there to talk about whether it’s Tibet Taiwan gentlemen’s Square protests now Hong Kong as part of it maps you can’t make it map of China that doesn’t show to Taiwan is part of China and it’s it’s just like a whole series of contentious issues is arena situation where where is China’s behavior reasonable. Is it the NBA you know has the NBA capitulated or has the NBA stood up for the correct American value.


S16: Well and then there’s larger question whether this is the NBA is job to stand up for correct American values and which is which are the values are they standing up for freedom of speech or or freedom to protest.


S26: Freedom of speech and where’s it responsibility lie.


S15: I mean I don’t know. The frightening thing is the economic power China has. And that’s only going to get bigger. And it’s only going to spread more and the collective way in which all the Chinese entities responded against the NBA. If you just look at this will ripple out as China becomes more powerful and the U.S. recedes as a globe as a global leader. And so if you look at this argument about freedom free speech and freedom to protest and freedom to push back against authoritarians. This is a conversation that the counterargument who’s making the counter argument globally against that. And that’s like an open question for the next 50 years.


S23: I mean I just I can’t stand the idea of American companies conceding to these like untruths and anti dramatic anti-democratic stances by China. Just seems like antithetical to American the American values I want to think that we have on the other hand you can see all the corporate incentives for doing the kinds of things that you know got the NBA into trouble to begin with. It’s sort of a no win situation for companies. But I mean. Yeah.


S8: David what do you think. I think the NBA has been OK here. I think they were put in a really difficult situation. I think they. I think that that they haven’t they have neither fully capitulated to China. Naw naw nor completely nor completely blown China off China’s really important market for them as a company and as a venture and I think it’s completely reasonable to to make accommodations when you’re trying to do business in a place to make accommodations to the culture and traditions and laws of that place. I think I what I am trying to wrap my head around is I am dead certain that companies that come to do business in the United States go through something similar and that we’re blind to it that we probably don’t see it. We’re not sure what it is. And I’m sure it’s not nearly as harsh as what happens in China where you have a state government a national government that imposes this kind of will and this kind of ideology on the businesses here. But I bet there are ways when you wanted to get into the U.S. market there’s certain kinds of policies you don’t pursue. You probably places you don’t do business you mean you can’t do business in Iran for example if you want to do certain kinds of business in the American market. So I don’t know that we are completely I’m not being what about us here. But I I just I think that there are that China is not unique in in creating expectations for companies that do business and I’m much more concerned when I think about what China is doing that messes with America. It’s much more around theft of intellectual property around kind of keeping businesses out of the Chinese market not allowing them to compete in the Chinese market. Those are the things that that concern me much more than the sort of telling an ideological line piece of it.


S16: But whether he does business with whether a company does business with Iran is quite different than a GM making a statement right. This is a much more attenuated than the example you gave.


S27: Yes for sure it’s definitely more tired as the ideological line trying not bother you in LA.


S23: I don’t know. I mean we’re talking about like a pretty major kind of double speak right. Like you can’t it’s propaganda. It’s like forcing American companies to basically spew propaganda about a foreign government I’m sure we’re not in order to not spew propaganda or to or to not spew truth.


S7: Yeah.


S21: It’s good to be silent rather than speak up and to silence their employees.


S6: Yeah that’s it. It’s not that bad. I’m not saying it’s good it’s good. I’m not saying it’s good. I’m just saying like a there’s.


S11: I obviously have not interrogated this well enough but somehow it doesn’t. Why is it not outraged me. I think what Adam Silver has done is great. I think Adam Silver has said okay these are private employees acting privately this is not the league endorsing it. And that’s where we stand and I suspect that that will blow over and the Chinese won’t be super happy about it. And that would be a I think that would be a reasonable place to be. I think it’s reasonable for private citizens to say what they want. Of course they’re Americans they should they should say what they want about matters that matter to them and that shouldn’t implicate the NBA its ability to do business. Do I think that the NBA itself should come out against and come out in favor of the Hong Kong protests. Probably it shouldn’t. I don’t think. I don’t think it’s reasonable to expect that they should or that the NBA should have a policy about about Chinese politics.


S23: Yeah I mean the idea that it’s not on the NBA to make a public proactive statement about the Hong Kong protests like yeah that seems OK. What amazes me here is the idea that China would have ever imagined that one GM supporting the Hong Kong protesters was something that it’s that that the corporation would like silence. I mean that I think is actually alarming because it suggests the kind of stifling of speech that authoritarian governments do expect from their within their own borders.


S19: But the idea that in order to get within those borders American companies are gonna play by those rules.


S16: I mean that takes away a whole social force and set of cultural and economic pressures for changing them or at least like not buying into them will in the fact that all these Chinese companies all punish the NBA suggests that the cost of doing business locally is snapping to the party line. So it’s not just a views about the U.S. but that what you must do as a company to operate in China is then to take up the cause and punish.


S23: Have you guys seen American factory a documentary about a Chinese factory opening in Ohio.


S21: No I really don’t. Good. Okay. Yeah. It’s really good.


S19: One of the trickiest things about it is the cultural conflict and it basically presents the Chinese as thinking that the American workers are being way too demanding. And of course this culminates in an effort to squash the union but it just makes you think that part of what is happening is just a different conception of identity and how people are supposed to live their lives and what they’re supposed to value and the Chinese version of it in the in the documentary it comes across as kind of strangling in this way that I found disturbing.


S1: Well I haven’t seen it. I really want to see it. I might but that may well be true. When I just I’ve never been to China and I think I have rose colored glasses about China. I just I keep coming back to the idea that this is a nation which has has in a generation done more to create health and prosperity and lift people out of poverty than any country in the history of the earth. That that if you think about you know measurements of human well-being what has happened in China in the last generation is the greatest improvement in human well-being in world history. And so so at at our peril we we assign you know we assign our moral values to everything that’s happening there but I but I also know that I’m probably delusional in key ways and that it’s a repressive regime which is bullying countries across the world and wants to impose its values on us and.


S5: All that’s true. Right. It’s about it’s about that. But exporting those authoritarian values right.


S4: I guess the question right. Maybe the question here is did or is isn’t an export. Is this them forcing something to happen overseas or is it them requiring something. Is it something that is for the Chinese market or is this something for the international market.


S23: They would view it as an import. Yeah that’s interesting.


S1: All right. By Slate Plus calculator.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your slate plus membership.


S2: Enjoy.


S3: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for January 30th, 2020.


S4: Forty nine years and 364 days of plotts edition. I’m David Plotz. That is obscure. It’s all about me because my 15th birthday is tomorrow, so I decide to name the show after myself. So just enjoy that.


S5: There’s a lot of acts of narcissism going on in the world right now. I’m glad you’ve added to the pile.


S6: That is Emily Bazelon. Not yet. 50 of New York Times magazine and Yale University joining from New Haven. Hello, Emily.


S7: Hello, David. And with me here in D.C., thank goodness he is 50, maybe 51, McAdam, 51.


S8: I’m on the xactly. I mean, I’m sure it’s a marvel that I didn’t trip over my walker getting in here.


S6: It’s John DICKERSON of CBS 60 Minutes in town to do some impeachment journalism for CBS. So check your television for some. DICKERSON It’s always good to get some tickers on television on today’s Gap.


S9: I started putting clips like the people that I used to find so annoying. I put clips of myself now on my Twitter feed on that person now. Oh, my. I know, I know. But I don’t do it that much. So it’s it’s OK.


S7: It’s OK. Did you name a show after yourself like I did?


S10: No, but I’m just I just want to own that because I just I feel as though I need to own that.


S11: There we go.


S7: On today’s gabfest, the Bolton grenade that has not yet exploded.


S12: Will it explode? Will the impeachment trial incorporate John Bolton or not? William Peterson trial last beyond Friday or not? Then we are just a few days away from the start of Democratic primary season. Where do we stand as the Iowa caucuses loom? On Monday, they loom. They loom. Can caucuses loom? They loiter. I think if you at a caucus, you loiter. Then the Supreme Court upholds a vile, stupid, un-American Trump policy about immigration. We’ll talk about that. And, of course, we’ll have cocktail chatter. Leaked details from John Bolton’s book looked likely to disrupt the impeachment trial the beginning of the week and to gut the president’s defense. Now, as we tape on Thursday morning, it seems more likely that the Republican caucus in the Senate will prefer to hear and see no evil at all. They speak plenty of evil and will block Democratic requests for witnesses at the trial and thus the incredible claims that Bolton has made incredible, totally credible claims that Bolton has made about the president’s specific involvement and withholding military aid to the Ukraine in order to get a political favor done for himself will not be heard, will not be accounted for in the trial. So, Emily, does it seem likely that they are going to block witnesses? Why are they going to do it? Is there any merit to their argument that they should do it?


S13: It does seem likely. I suppose they are going to do it because they want to acquit President Trump. And so any complicating factor is unwelcome and it doesn’t really matter whether it could change the ballgame or not. Like if you don’t want the end result to be different and you’ve predetermined it, then why allow new information that could disrupt your plan? And I don’t think there is any kind of reasonable argument for not hearing this out. It’s directly relevant. It’s the first person who directly spoke to President Trump about the tie between withholding the aid and the investigative material that Trump wanted from Ukraine. So like this is the firsthand witness that, you know, the Republicans and Trump have said all along didn’t exist. He does exist. He was our national security advisor. He was a very high up Trump official.


S14: And the notion that we’re going to have this proceeding end without hearing from him directly under oath, it just I it it is totally hard to swallow. Politically, just logically mean everything.


S5: I feel like it’s this really weird drama that’s got like missing its key moment and finger and is just going to sort of peter out.


S1: John, I want to hear what you think about this, but I also want to talk about whether the Democrats should be calling John Bolton. I mean, they didn’t want to take this pressure off the Senate to do it.


S15: But Democrats in the House, Democrats I mean, Democrats in the House. Right. Sorry. Yes. I mean, Adam Schiff’s committee.


S11: Well, I think you you’ve just answered your own question, which is they want the center of this. They want this to be for the Senate to have to wrestle with this issue. And then if the Senate decides not to call witnesses, then what’s it then? Then, you know, then I guess the House could try and do something. I although I suspect that Nancy Pelosi will decide that the moment has passed and that they need in order to keep their majority in the House, they need to go back to tending their fields. And that means making sure they protect those districts that are going to be more at issue and more more battleground D where where the electorate is not so not and not as liberal and and or who’ve gotten sick of impeachment. But it is amazing because, David, White House defense team had been arguing there’s nobody here who can talk directly about what conversations they had with the president. And then when that person shows up, they suddenly don’t want to hear from them. Basically, we know the politics of of why they don’t want to hear with him. But but it does strike me that when if politicians are traditionally risk averse, the members of the Senate are making a bet.


S8: And I felt this way at the beginning of the trial. And now now it’s been proved with the Bolton revelations. But they’re making a bet not only that the country will think that Donald Trump didn’t do anything that’s impeachable. They’re making a bet. Not only that, the country won’t penalize them for not calling witnesses, but they’re making a bet that in the future nothing will come out. That will be damaging where people could say, you know, you had the opportunity to figure all this out by calling witnesses and you didn’t. Therefore, we’re going to penalize you. They’re assuming none of that stuff’s going to take place or they are assuming that the president has so much power to punish them. And we saw some of this on Wednesday when he was tweeting to the Republicans in the Senate has so much power within the Republican Party to punish them if they were to vote for witnesses, that that’s more of a risk and a danger than whatever penalty they might play for future shoes that drop that would relate to their not having called witnesses.


S7: I mean, this fight is absolutely ludicrous because what’s funny is that I do think that if you talk to any of these Republican senators, you would find them to be people of honor. I think they believe themselves to be people of honor. They suspect. I suspect that for the most part, they act honorably in their own life. Most of the time. And they probably act with integrity in their own life most of the time. But it is so strange to think these are people who are completely un willing to act in a way to defend the institution they’re supposed to defend and to uphold. The institution are supposed to defend. There’s a. Mazing as recline tweet thread about this fight over the witnesses, and it’s ridiculous because we all know the underlying facts. We now basically know the underlying facts. We know what the president did. We know there is now. With Bolton asserting this, there’s incredibly strong first hand evidence that the president has done this thing, which which before everyone would have agreed, you know, is an offense contravening the constitution. Is it? You know, if that’s not a high crime to cheat, to win an election and to undermine congressional legislation, to undermine U.S. foreign policy in order to trump up an investigation of a political opponent in order to win election. That is not a high crime. Like, I don’t even know what it is. And I think if you talk to people a year ago, they would have every Republican would have agreed with you and that they will not even look at this behavior. They will not even acknowledge it because the system is completely broken, because the legislature is now a completely non-functional legislature like the Roman Senate. This is like the late Roman Senate. It is an imaginary institution now. And it’s it’s an absolute catastrophe for the country. If this if this legislation with the legislature does not act to defend its prerogatives and to stand up for what it has to do.


S9: And just to add just a tiny little thing that’s connected to the fact that the president has more power over their political future. And that’s the thing they worry about the most. And why does you have that?


S11: It’s because of the partisanship that we have, the partisan age we live in, where the most partisan members of the Republican Party are, the most of the thing that Republican senators fear them. Well, but you know what?


S1: Right. They’re probably right about the political calculation they’re making. Yeah.


S7: They are protecting their political future rather than the future of the institution and the country. They are not saying I’m like, but I’m bolstering your point. Yeah, no, no, I’m not disagreeing with you. I’m saying. But isn’t that isn’t that tragic that people are not willing to say, you know what it is? My job as a senator is not is not worth sacrificing the institution of the Senate. And these these defenses that we’ve built around this this over 200 years to ensure that we’re not taken over by an autocratic dictator. And instead they’re like, you know what, I get to get re-elected and tell him to get re-elected. And what a terrible thing to do. I wish they had more courage. I wish we all had more courage.


S1: But the thing is, I feel like we have been walking toward this end for a while and that the incentives are just completely misaligned. And the only thing little change it is changing elections, which is hard because these are fairly abstract questions about rule of law and democracy. And it’s not clear that they are going to determine the next election is all. It’s a blunt instrument, an election. There are a lot of other factors that are going to go into that. And for a lot of people who are not following this closely, this probably doesn’t matter that much. That’s a pretty rational calculus. Can I? I feel like we have to pause a moment on John Bolton because we all, I think, expressed a lot of skepticism. I know I was skeptical that he was going to come.


S16: I was more skeptical. I was most skeptic. I would like to join you all in the skepticism camp anyway. Carry on.


S1: So what do we make of this? I mean, is this Bolton the truth teller? Because in the end, like, he has this very strong ideology and ideas about what’s supposed to happen. But he is like a government servant, an official. And he was as dismayed as the people who work for him about the highly irregular abuse of power he was seeing. And what do we make of his silence? Like he could stand up and talk at any moment and make this harder. I also it’s was fascinating to me to see the entire Republican machine, including the right wing media, just turn on him on a dime. Right. This is a guy who’s been on Fox a million times, who was like loyal, fairly heroic, much more consistently conservative in his position taking than Donald Trump. And yet it literally took 5 seconds for the entire artillery to start firing at him.


S10: Yeah. So that let me let’s start on that last point, because it’s that’s happened with basically there are 20 or so people who had the impression that the president was doing all of this in the furtherance of his re-election campaign and not for any other reason that was in the national interest. So 20 or so people got it wrong. This is at an all 20 of them have been attacked as either members of the deep state or closet liberals or many of them were hired by the president who had this had this feeling, Bolton being the paramount one. And then the president trashed him and now he’s being thoroughly trashed.


S17: Can that many people all be for their professional life hiding these vitriol and awful sides of themselves that then are suddenly excavated when they say the wrong thing? I mean, it’s just so that that is. This has been a pattern throughout this process. And the turning on John Bolton has been amazing. John Bolton, among many other things, worked in the Reagan just. Department pushing Robert Bork so that Reagan would actually pick him. I mean, he’s been he has been a stalwart conservative through whoof all the battles. And now Donald Trump, who has switched parties three, four, five times I can’t remember, was never a conservative, isn’t a conservative now is causing this Saliha of Bolton. So the question then is what’s Bolton going to do? And going back to my my point about the senators, they know his book is going to come out. They know he’s going to say things, that he’s going to say more and other things that they could have heard him say under testimony that they didn’t and they decided not to. So I wonder what happens to a Bolton scorned now that that it looks like he might not be called as a witness? And what does he have? What does that look like when the book comes out and when he starts talking?


S7: Well, do you think their view that that I mean, the facts are known. I mean, the facts are out now. If we if we posit that what Bolton a thing is true, which I would posit it probably is. Does it seem to be affecting people? Does it seem to matter? I mean, it is this feeling like like a significant fraction of the American public now think there was a huge cover up and that the Senate is a betting that cover up or is it? No, it hasn’t. Well, it hasn’t moved anything.


S18: Vast majority. It’s big majorities want witnesses to be called. And, you know, now the polls are getting specific about Bolton. And if people are following it well enough, they want him to be called.


S9: So in the sense that, like people want to hear from them directly, there is buy-in on that, except those polls are a little funky because they show a lot of Republicans want witnesses. And what those Republicans mean is they want Hunter Biden. So inside those polls, if you look at who are the Republicans who really want more witnesses to be called, it turns out they’re the people who self-identify as the most conservative and the non-college white male voter who’s the very blunt center of the Trump base. So there’s there’s a little messiness in the in in those polls that show overwhelming support for witnesses.


S1: You know, I also have been thinking about Hunter Biden. I mean, I don’t think that this impeachment trial is about Hunter Biden as like his guilt or innocence. But I feel like the country needs to hear from John Bolton. And if it takes having Hunter Biden testify to make that happen, that seems worth it to me. Does that seem like the wrong call you like. Suddenly I’ve been thinking like, why is why is it so off limits to have Hunter Biden show up?


S7: I think it’s not off limits because it’s a political process and anything can happen if that’s what it takes to get it. I’m with you, Emily. But Hunter Biden doesn’t have anything to do with the underlying accusations like he’s not.


S1: Well, he does in the sense that like explaining what his role was is relevant to the corrupt intent that Trump had or didn’t have when he made this decision. Right. Like that. In that sense, it’s not totally off base, but doesn’t isn’t the closer way to get it.


S11: That is what was actually in Trump’s head rather than what was the truth of what, 100?


S14: Right. It’s true. I guess the thing is, I keep getting tangled up in the way in which this is called a trial, but it’s not a real trial, because if it was really a trial, then there would be a question about whether the defendant was going to testify or not. And the way you would get it, his mindset would be his decision about whether to go on the record, about his own mindset. And if he doesn’t want to testify, he thinks it’s incriminating or just he’s not going to testify. That’s his constitutional right. And then you could infer it from these other witnesses and judges would make decisions. But we’re not in that land. And there’s a way in which I think even calling this a trial and using the words of the court of law, which are being so bastardized, is really a problem.


S8: You know, I was just trying to play out this kind of what happens when Bolton does his book tour. And you could imagine a situation. And, you know, I’ll say it again, Ben Franklin, when they talked about impeachment, said the point of impeachment was not just to convict, but to exonerate. You could imagine a scenario in which Bolton comes forward. The Republican senators sort his answers as they’ve sorted every other piece of information and conclude that the president was either innocent or guilty, but not not worthy of impeachment. And he the president’s able to claim exoneration and Bolton is subsumed under that exoneration. Now, what will happen if he doesn’t come as a witness is his book comes out. He not only talks about what we already know, but then in the interviews says things like, no, there was never any every any evidence. He cared about corruption. He cared only about this thing relative to count and says other things that are harmful for the president in the election context, that that might be even more dangerous than if he testified in the actual in the actual Senate. One of the one of the questions that was really interesting that the senators, Murkowski Collins asked of the White House defendants was, would you have any evidence of the president raising the issue of corruption before Hunter? He found out one Hunter Biden was connected and they didn’t have any evidence. And John Bolton could speak to that as well. If that comes out in the closer in the campaign context, maybe that’s you could imagine. That being even more damaging than him testifying in the Senate context.


S1: Do you think, John, that there is a way in which the Republicans are holding out hope that Trump is going to succeed in smothering John Bolton, that Bolton is going to get scared? They’re hanging up the buck in this prepublication review. They’re saying now, you know, it could be months. Maybe they postpone the publication and they kind of muzzle him till after the election and they hope they’ve scared him off. I mean, it seems to me like he would be that. But like, I can’t imagine him keeping quiet for that long. And yet, like, they’re clearly hoping they can intimidate him.


S8: Well, I probably and that they hope that that fight will only strengthen the passion of the Trump voters. And that passion will, a, go to the president or B, not go against them. I mean, they want to keep the president’s strongest supporters off their front lawns. And so that’s probably the big the most. Governing exam thing. And then I think they will hope that the Democrats will pick a nominee and the social good who will be so objectionable that will somehow lead to the president’s re-election.


S1: Right. And if you think of the base of Trump’s base is only being about Trump. And the only thing that matters is whether something’s good for Trump or bad for Trump than feeding John Bolton to the beast like sacrificing. It was a totally easy call. Like it’s easy for the Trump base to turn on him. They don’t care that he worked for the Justice Department and tried to advocate for Robert Bork. They don’t care about any of that stuff. And so once you see it through that lens, like it’s very easy to toss him.


S8: And secondarily, once you see Senate elections as determined mostly by national issues now. And what’s the biggest national issue? The president, once you see that connection, then their fortunes, even in swing states, are so closely tied to the president’s base that that that only supports your thing further.


S7: Here’s what I don’t understand is, John, last week you were citing I think as I was, I was I was working up a head of steam about this. You were saying, well, what’s what’s interesting, actually, so few people identify politics as their primary sorting mechanism and the primary way that they define themselves. Yet we’re in a situation where I think, you know, if you if you polled Trump’s voters and you to describe the behavior that he’s engaged in in the abstract as something a politician engage. And if you talk to them a year ago and so this is something somebody did, they would agree it is wicked and corrupt and and wrong and that no one should serve the country who behave that way. But because some set of allegiances and that that partisan and tribal identity is so strong, they accept it and are willing not just accept it, endorse it like come out full throatedly for it, are not bothered by it. Consider his those attacking him to be the wicked ones. So there’s clearly something that has gone awry whereby there isn’t for a very large chunk of people in this country. Something has overcome their their rational, analytical sense about politics and about how they vote. Like it’s it’s very, very strong. It’s strong on both sides, but it’s especially strong on the right in this group. And I think you’re right that probably most of the people, if you ask them what is their first way, they define themselves. Most people would not say around their political identity. But somehow we’ve gotten in a situation where people, you know, work with the same people. People like them. They live with people like them. They worship with people like them. They don’t worship with people like them. And there is some kind of massive sorting hat that has put us in these divided places where even if politics isn’t your first go to definitional identity, you you have locked into it. It is a piece of who you are in a way that didn’t used to be an it causing you to think tribally first rather than in some other way in ways that weren’t that wasn’t true for most of the 20th century. And it’s terrible. It’s absolutely terrible.


S9: Yeah. I mean, it’s. And as reclines book on polarization, which has just come out and goes through all of this. But to give you some indication what you’re talking about. In 2011, there was a Public Religion Research Institute poll that had 60 percent of white evangelicals saying that a public official who commits an immoral act in their personal life can’t fulfill the ethical duties of a public life. So then in 2016, the same question was asked and found only 20 percent of evangelicals responding to the same question in the same way. So from 60 percent to 20 percent. So on these baseline issues of morality and there are basically the same the same number is true for for truth-telling and moral leadership. The numbers have all cratered and crashed. And so that’s the way in which the identity politics and the tribal nature has basically not just changed your position on trade or immigration or the deficit, all of which have spun around in head snapping ways from what the stated policy of the party were. But then all on all these underlying at. Attributes of morality, honesty, character. They’ve all dropped drastically. And so that’s the situation we find ourselves in on the eve of the 2020 election.


S1: So I feel like there’s so many contributing factors to this. Right. Because part of what you’re seeing is, I think, just a more cynical view. At least that’s my interpretation of that drop in those numbers, John, is like politics is a cynical business. It’s all about dealmaking. Don’t imagine that your core values, which you still think are important in your personal life, are going to translate into that realm. Imagine it as dirty and transactional. And then, you know, it’s the rest of your personal life, it’s your church, it’s your education, you’re your community in which those values play out. Right.


S10: I would I would agree. I would say two to two other things. One is that they feel like the other is a virulent threat to everything they hold dear, both in life and in politics. So there are lots of numbers about in the 50s they started asking people, would you be OK if your child married somebody of another party? And the country is roughly OK with that. Partisans now are not OK with that at all. And so then the number of people who see in the Democratic Party, you see Republicans as the enemy, as as a threat to the fundamental values of American life has jumped considerably. The same is true with Republicans who think Democrats are a threat. So if you think the people on the other side, you think the wolf is at the door, you’re willing to accept some changes in you on your side’s behavior and you will sort you will forgive your side, anything if you think that the danger of the other side is worse. And then the president has delivered extraordinarily well for the core constituency of his base on taxes, on regulations, on identity, on defense spending, on judges. So negative partisanship plus delivery means I’m willing to tolerate all kinds of things because I’m getting what I want. And the other side is absolutely so much worse.


S1: Right. I mean, I think the other thing I keep thinking about is like there are lots of reasons that you can always think the other side is contributing to this corrupt transactional right. Like you can always find something. And I have been thinking about that. This in watching Alan Dershowitz defend Trump this week. So, I mean, this is to me like one of the most shameful acts of sophistry I’ve ever seen from a lawyer.


S19: And the notion that you would have this law professor with this vaunted in some ways liberal past and I should disclose say here, though, I wish at the moment we’re not true.


S14: The Dershowitz clerked for my grandfather before he clerked on the Supreme Court. So this is someone who kind of has those roots. You know, for years has in many ways betrayed them on issues. I would argue like Israel and has defended, you know, people like Klaus von Bulow. And so now we’re seeing that kind of trial tactic put to use for President Trump. And I think they’re all kinds of reasons personally why Dershowitz is doing this. He’s changing the channel from Jeffrey EPSTEIN. You know, a sex offender with whom he is closely associated, he complained about being ignored and shunned on Martha’s Vineyard last summer. I’m sure that the entire Harvard faculty, you know, if they could do anything to him to signal their dismay and just like utter I can’t even think what the word is. They would do it. You know, they can’t like he has academic freedom. And, of course, there will be no professional consequences in that sense. But it’s been just shocking to watch him. And the argument that he made on Wednesday where he was essentially arguing for unlimited presidential power, he was a he used this phrase in the public interest, saying that a president who in the public interest is trying to further his own election by doing something like trading, you know, the withholding of aid from Ukraine for dirt on the Bidens. Like that’s okay, as long as the president subjectively imagines it’s in the public interest. Like this is just the most I mean, it makes no sense on 10 levels. And there are five other crazy and ridiculous and risible arguments that Alan Dershowitz has made in the last week and the entire legal academy and every responsible legal journalist tries to take him down. But it doesn’t matter. The Republicans are grassing me and he gets up there with his trial skills and continues to make these points. And like, how can you blame people in the world for watching this and just thinking like this is a completely bankrupt system? Like, I feel like Alan Dershowitz is to legal academics right now what Bush versus Gore was to the Supreme Court. Just a really fair reason to just lose faith in the entire enterprise, even though, of course, like that’s not fair, because he is being also, you know. Every legal academic has been saying he’s wrong. It still just has that kind of terrible poisonous effect.


S11: Just to read the quote, it says, Dershowitz, if a president does something which he believes will help him get elected in the public interest, that cannot be the kind of quid pro quo that results in impeachment. That was the nub of that argument that you were saying, which if you read fifteen seconds of the constitutional convention debates would have made all of the men who nailed the windows shut in that room, break the windows and run screaming from the room, because it’s a total perversion of the way they thought about power and the presidency.


S6: Slate Plus members, you get bonus segments on the Gap vest and on other Slate podcasts. Go to slate.com plus gabfest plus to become a member today. Today we’re gonna talk about the Felicia Sann mess.


S20: I’m not sure if that’s how you say your name, but I’m guessing that Kobe Bryant Washington Post kerfuffle and how the Post screwed that up. So good to slate.com. Flash Gabfests plus to become a member. The Iowa caucuses on Monday, it is the closest race that had ever been in the Iowa caucus history. We have four candidates, four of them who are polling above the 15 percent threshold.


S6: We have Sanders and Biden at the top in the low 20s, with Sanders clearly having some momentum and taking the first position at the moment as we approach Monday. But a judge and Warren are in the mid-teens club, which are still in their 9 percent. They’re never we’d never had that many candidates cluster that high before. So, John, what as you as you go into this weekend and get ready for Iowa on Monday, what does it look like it’s happening? Is does Sanders have momentum, if that? Is that true? Has he taken a lead? Does that matter?


S8: Yeah, I think well, I mean, he certainly has momentum in the in the listener’s just an F.Y.I.


S6: Jon has a beautiful, incredibly complicated colored chart in front of him.


S21: It’s the FiveThirtyEight who’s ahead in Iowa. Chart my go to my go to source for all polling and and wisdom.


S17: So it is it is a beautiful chart, but some things we know are true.


S22: Sanders the Sanders versus Warren question, which is which was up in the air, has it looks like it has sorted and Sanders has come out ahead of Warren for those people who share their view of the world where things stand with respect to these, the liberals versus moderates, just to be used to in some imprecision there in the sorting.


S10: But between that all and remains to be seen in in what goes ahead. We do know what’s happening is there is a Sanders sort of a Sanders freakout. A lot of writing and thinking and talking about how it would be a disaster if he became the Democratic Party’s nominee. And some really interesting conclusions being drawn by his supporters about what the country needs, which relies on accepting some things about what Donald Trump has done. That I think is really fascinating in terms of looking at the country and saying, well, we need our version of Donald Trump. And what then that would if you play that out, you know, just one question that raises is Donald Trump is a extremely powerful high threshold of pain tolerant person for what he is pushing forward and does it in a way that many people advocating for Sanders find wholly objectionable. Nevertheless, if you were gonna be the left’s version of that breaking apart the system, are you going to have the Teflon stuff and starchy ness that Trump has to confront the system? And where do you see that and how does that play out? It interests me.


S6: Emily, what you think is the capacity for Iowa caucus goers to surprise on Monday? Do you think? I mean, maybe there’s a better question for you, John. Like what? How likely are results in Iowa to be close to the incoming polls? Because it usually with elections there, very big things like primaries, they’re very close. But in this caucus, is it likely to be very close?


S8: Well, I think it depends how those second choices and how people when you because in the caucus, you can reapportion your support and that that’s always the big surprise in Iowa. So I think there’s a great chance there might be a surprise. Then there would be relative to, say, New Hampshire. I think although as I say that I feel a but I you can bet on the possibility of surprise. I think it’s a fun place to be.


S1: I mean, what you’re talking about is the 15 percent threshold in the caucuses. Right. Like in the room where you caucus, if your candidate doesn’t get to 15 percent, you have a chance to switch your support to someone else. So it’s a sort of form of ranked choice voting in this limited way. And that, I think does add more uncertain to the outcome.


S23: And that is certainly a piece about the other piece of it, is that a caucus is intrinsically a higher threshold of investment to participate. It’s just like requires more work. You need more time consuming. And so it’s it’s likely to get more engaged set of voters or more more kind of committed to a particular candidate, set of voters who’ve been galvanized to show up. So turnout and who has the more enthusiasm is also likely to register. And which particular groups is it easier to get to a caucus and who has time to do it? Which candidate which candidate is voters who have more time to do it?


S24: So those are all elements that may, I think, shape it. Emily, we talked last week. I just need to repeat my fury at The New York Times, which spent months creating endorsement that managed to have exactly zero impact because of how they followed it up. Pretty much it flopped. We didn’t. We did it. We did it. We did. But I’m just on Elizabeth Warren’s behalf. I’m getting angry because. But The Des Moines Register endorsed her this week.


S6: Do you get any sense that like that that Warren who whose campaign I still you know, the one I really hold out a lot of hope for and wish would take off that that there’s any chance that that endorsement or that anything that’s going on in Iowa could boost her in a way that. Could help her recover.


S1: I guess what I wonder is whether the backlash to Bernie, which was strong this week. I mean, there was the register endorsement for Warren. There were pieces by Jonathan Chait and David Frum just pointing out from their point of view the wild risk Democrats would be taking by choosing Bernie because he’s so far to the left of the American electorate. I wonder if those will sink in with voters in Iowa. I mean, there is this interesting dynamic going on in which, you know, I think a lot of Democrats weren’t interested in spending a lot of time attacking Bernie Sanders. They just figured, like, this campaign wasn’t going to succeed because he wasn’t going to be able to capture a large enough share of the Democratic primary and it would kind of take care of itself. And because his supporters are passionately committed to him, it didn’t seem like a good idea to go around alienating them. If he wins Iowa and New Hampshire and possibly Nevada, is it going to be too late? Because certainly at that point, everyone is going to be taking it very seriously and trying to stop the train. And I asked that question not because I think like it’s so I ask it not for sort of policy reasons, but political ones.


S6: I want to make two points about that, because first of all, another Warren angle here, which is that one of the things that definitely happened. I read a piece about this now I can’t rember where I read it is that Warren took all the fire on the policy. Positions that both she and Sanders hold. So Warren rolled out this Medicare for all funding proposal, which from a policy perspective may have been very smart, but from political perspective has been absolutely disastrous for her. Because it’s it’s it’s put a whatever it is, 20 trillion dollar albatross around her neck price tag. And Sanders has not had to have the same defensive of his policy proposals, which are, if anything, more expensive and less articulated and less clear than Warren’s. And so she’s been able to skate on that stuff. She took all the bullets and it’s really wounded her. And he has not had to suffer. And he’s not he’s allowed to live in his his realm of fantasy, which I think it’s fine. I mean, we have every conservative candidate has been allowed to live in their realm of fantasy with their policy proposals. And I think that’s OK. It’s just that Warren was not permitted to live in it. And then there’s that piece of it. And then I do think like seeing the brainiac center left of Chait and from and will sell tarnish, I thought wrote a great piece in Slate too.


S7: Yeah, that was a good rise. And say like, look, this is going to be really dangerous. Not necessarily because Sanders I think some of it is that Sanders his positions are so far to the left. That is one problem. Others that socialism moniker is a disaster for Democrats. It is going to be a disaster if they have a socialist who is running it. It’s basically it it it it makes it so easy for Trump Trump to demonize, to skirt his own appalling failings and to to just make it all about scaring the public about this other person who who’s on the right and hit the others. Bertalan, representing like the Soviet Union practically. It’s gonna be a disaster if they have a socialist.


S9: And I just just to tack on a little bauble to that is that people may listen and say, well, they’ve been calling Democrat socialists since since Harry Truman, which is, of course, quite true. But the argument that Chage and solitano make is that with with Bernie, they don’t make this argument. But I will in an era of negative partisanship in which that tends to be the way that voters go, the negative charge about your side does animator does animate voters in a way that it didn’t with Truman. Secondly, there is actual and there’s footage of of Sanders playing with communists as opposed to, you know, call Joe Biden a communist. It does it it sticks more is the argument with with when he calls himself a socialist.


S6: Right. So Truman didn’t call himself a socialist, right? Right. Yes.


S5: That’s well, and there’s footage of him like singing This land is your land, you know, with Russians, like years ago, very happily. Like, right there. It’s true. He did spent his honeymoon in Russia. Right. Like he did there was that affinity.


S7: I would definitely think this land is your land with anybody. I would think with with Kim Jong un. Right. I love that song.


S22: So the concern expressed already for president. Yeah. And the concern expressed with those just to go to a voting group is suburban women, suburban Republican women who aren’t going to vote for Donald Trump could be given a reason to vote for him because they could be so scared about, you know, whatever the socialism of burning.


S17: And by the way, the person that might scare them is not Donald Trump. It might be some Democrat who comes out and says, I can’t we can’t have Bernie Sanders be our president.


S10: And then that position becomes more acceptable to a group of people who’ve written off and stopped listening to the president. This is the this is the fear.


S18: I mean, we should also say it is completely possible that all of this is going to end in Joe Biden being the nominee. Right. That enough Democrats will say, wait a second, this is not what we want. This is not what we’re going to work. And the alternative won’t be Elizabeth Warren for the reasons that you were laying out, David. It will be Joe Biden. And when you’re looking for the candidate who has the best chance to win Pennsylvania, that is like a perfectly rational case to make. And I also felt better when I read. I think Laura McGann wrote the case for Joe Biden inbox this week. And what reassured me was looking at the policy proposals and realizing how much the field has pull. And the moment has pulled Biden to the left.


S1: Now, whether he’s really going to deliver on those things, because he often says things that make him seem like so much a part, a candidate of the past establishment that I think can still give liberal Democrats real pause.


S9: But if you’re, you know, like I’ll just stop there, wonder what the moderate wing of the party will do after some of this sorting takes place in in Iowa and New Hampshire.


S8: What happened in 1996 with Republicans as Lamar Alexander, of all people, came in third in Iowa.


S21: And people, like went, oh, my gosh, Lamar might be the guy because, you know, Dole was too old and the Conservatives were too starchy.


S25: And Lamar and that was it. And that ended in New Hampshire. But so the question is, will that happen? Will people go Colebatch or or will college or not do very well?


S21: But a judge not do very well. And people say, okay, the Bernie.


S17: Threat is is is real and we must now all coalesce spine, Joe, and the sorting goes and then boom, that happens quickly, or does it become a fight among the moderates, which all works very well for Bernie Sanders, because then there’s no real like safe alternative to him because they’re all carving each other up in that lane.


S7: Hammer one of the most enjoyable stories ever did. I think I did this in 2000. Maybe isn’t maybe a 99 nine is the premise of the piece was why would you give money to Lamar Alexander is doomed presidential campaign. And so I called up people who given a money. And one of the things that people would say, they all had this bank shot thievery, which was that 96, he was your nine thousand eight hundred sixty four votes from finishing second in New Hampshire. And had he finished second in New Hampshire. The whole race would have been different and he would have been the nominee. And so it’s just we just need to kind of he was that close to being our nominee then. And so now we got to give him a chance. Lamar Alexander, great. No, no, no. Shame on him. It was a perfectly honorable, good senator, good politician, you know, for his party, whatever. But it was just I loved talking to the people who were, you know, who wasted whatever thousand dollars they were wasting on that campaign.


S1: Can I say one more thing about Bernie, like the people who are passionately devoted for Bernie to Bernie. You can understand and appreciate their reasons, right? I mean, they look at the political landscape and they think, well, everyone said there was no way Donald Trump could win and he won. And like, we want the person who we know is going to come through for us. And once he’s out there making his authentic case for this alternative, which is about recognizing how the system is rigged, that’s what Bernie I think legitimately shares with Trump. And he’s offering such a better alternative. Like people are going to get it and they’re gonna vote for it.


S9: And also, just to spite or just to take that take up that line of argumentation and rebut what I said earlier. They could also say this corrective needs to take place and who cares how it takes place because it’s gonna take place better with Bernie Sanders than it is with a Donald Trump presidency. It’s gonna take place better with Bernie Sanders than it is a Joe Biden presidency. So, sure, it might be a big question mark about how this revolution actually gets carried out because of the way the country is and also because of Bernie Sanders particular attributes. But we can all figure that out later. The most important thing, as you mentioned earlier. Emily, elections are blunt instruments and this instrument just needs to be played by someone to totally mangle the the instrument metaphor.


S7: Walker All right, last quick question on this. So every time Iowa comes around, there’s this question about is the Iowa caucus a good form of an election? Is it useful to have this odd, unusual caucus format where people wait, where there’s this form of ranked choice voting where you have to, you know, everyone has to gather together and spend an evening together, hard to vote, lots of time. And then there’s the question of, is Iowa the right state to start anything in so rural, so white? I’m kind of go back and forth. Part of me thinks, actually, this is a great way to start the campaign because it’s such a test of the test of enthusiasm at the test of organizing ability, the test of retail campaigning ability. You get higher information. Voters who are willing to participate in that like that, send the signal to the country. Oh, yeah, the higher information. People really do feel like this guy or this woman is the the best candidate. So that seems good. I mean, it would be better if they did this in Michigan or Georgia than in Iowa. But in general, I think I’m I think I’m slightly in favor despite myself.


S14: I’m coming down really hard on the other side. I mean, first of all, it’s infuriating that Iowa plays this role because it’s so white and rural, but also it’s just infuriating that the same state plays it every time like that is wrong. And I’m so tired of not having my vote count. It drives me crazy. Like there is nothing better about the people in Iowa and New Hampshire than the rest of us. We should get our turn or they should do it on the same day or something. It’s so like drastically.


S6: Actually, can I just quit? John, this will be the last word on this. Quickly, why do the parties know we have to act if I have to.


S15: But you on the court. Why? Go ahead.


S7: Why don’t they rotate it? Why is it that Iowa, New Hampshire and now Nevada and South Carolina get this lock?


S22: Well, it’s a complicated historical thing, but it goes back to your point about the death of the parties and the the local parties and their traditions are more powerful. And if you’re running for office and you think you’ve got a chance in Iowa, you’d suck up to the party and you want Iowa to be the to be the first. And so. And also, by the way, you’ve been campaigning for years in Iowa and you’ve been campaigning for other candidates in Iowa. And so you’ve been building up all these chits with the game as it is now played. And so you’ve banked a lot of things. So what you would need to do and I think it would be great if every time they just picked a new state and there were none of the normal because there’s a lot of built in stuff in these states that leads to patterns of behavior that you would want to shake up. You know, you want you wouldn’t. Once the local Puba. Who’s really important to have as much power. You’d want a new pew by who had to actually be freshly convinced, not not somebody who’d been convinced in 1980 that way.


S7: So why? I mean, everyone knows this. Why isn’t why doesn’t some candidate who’s gonna be a strong candidate that everyone knows can be a strong candidate. Say, you know, we’re gonna shake it and we’re gonna we’re gonna for it. We’re going to do in California first.


S22: Well, McCain tried a version that when he didn’t play in Iowa and was was nominated in private to the party by by playing in New Hampshire. And others have. Others have tried that. There’s not a strong enough candidate to change the party also. Once you get strong enough, you’d have to be president and then you’ve got other stuff to worry about. So it would require the electorate basically saying forcing the Democratic Party to do this, you’d have to have the reform bubble up through. I think the Democratic Party systems, which is how the superdelegates got watered down and how the portion of one thing that’s different is Iowa doesn’t mean the delegate apportionment is more spread out, which leads to a longer, possibly longer contest. Also, the way people can stop if they want to, you know, reform starts at home. Just don’t put so much weight on Iowa. When somebody scores the first basket in basketball. People don’t leave the stadium. They they expect a contest in which people shoot additional baskets in the basket, go in for one team and the other team. And then, you know, at the end of a game, there’s a score.


S12: What a metaphor.


S1: I want to go back to your affection for the caucuses, David. I used to feel this way, and I remember covering them in 2008 with some affection. It’s a terrible idea to up the cost of participating in the democracy. You end up with a smaller group of people and yeah, they’re committed and they’re high information, but also they’re not everybody like what we should have is a democracy that lowers the barriers as much as possible so that we hear from as many people as possible. And I mean, this is a slight tangent, but there’s lots of research about like in cities, when you have neighborhood groups, when you have local like zoning meetings, who comes, who comes or like the loudest people, the retirees, the people with the time. I was just listening to I can all go find the name of this political science professor was this book called I think Neighborhood Defenders, which is like another way of thinking about the NIMBY problem.


S19: And she crunched a ton of data in New York state and it showed that these were people who are older and whiter and more conservative than the communities they came from. And they had a kind of lock on the local process because they were showing up to these meetings like that’s not it should not be the test. That should not be what decides policy.


S6: Hey, Jeff Facelessness, if you’re a slate plus member, you’re gonna get a treat. You’ve just heard us preview the Iowa caucuses, but we can do a post view of the Iowa caucuses on Monday night when a tape, a special slate plus episode of the show following the caucuses after we have some results. We’re gonna talk about what they portend for the coming election. So we should have that show to you early on Tuesday. If you’re a slate plus member, you will get it. And if you’re not a puzzle or become a slate putthe member today, go to slate.com plus gap us plus and you’ll get that extra show on Tuesday.


S12: Emily, the Supreme Court this week vacated a district court order which barred enforcement of a new Trump administration. Rule change around what’s called the public charge rule. A public charge principle. What happened? What what does the public charge issue? What did the court do? And why is it so unbelievably appalling?


S1: So we’ve had this phrase, public charge in immigration law since the 19th century. And the very general idea is that when immigrants come to this country, they shouldn’t be people who it seems like will become a burden on the public purse, like they’re not supposed to be sucking up all our tax money. It has been very conservatively interpreted this phrase for years. So like or I suppose I should say, actually, let’s break it down a little differently. If you come here and you’re not documented or you’re even if you are trying to get on a path to citizenship for the first five years, you’re not eligible for Medicaid and food stamps and other basic social safety net programs. So this notion that you’re like a burden on the taxpayers is just false in that context. Once you’ve been here for five years, if you’re trying to get a green card, then, yes, you become eligible for those programs. What’s going to happen now is people are going to be really scared about applying for any of that because there’s going to be this very subjective test where the government could then decide to deny you your green card or citizenship based on your past participation. It’s pretty technical and hard to understand. And people are just going to get super nervous and they’re also going to be scared of signing up their U.S. born U.S. citizen children for these programs. Even though those kids are still eligible. They’re. And I think we’ll wait a second. Like, who knows what’s going to happen? And you can hardly blame them for that fear.


S19: But the other biggest problem is the people who are trying to come in from other countries who aren’t even here yet, because essentially what this do very subjective test does is suggest that people from poor countries could become public charges. And so this is like the real reason why Stephen Miller, Trump’s immigration official, who is so right wing and xenophobic and I would say bigoted. This is why he cares so much about this, because it’s a way of changing the equation of where American immigrants come from and making more of them come from predominantly white, more well-off countries. So that’s the real sort of illness at the center of the shift.


S10: Can you. I know you said it was complicated, but can you explain what the test is that denied citizenship? It’s that it’s basically you some test of your. Of whether you don’t have to go on public programs. But is it by by income? Is it by.


S18: It’s it’s about the amount of time that you’ve spent.


S7: Good amount of time. Yes. The amount of time you spent and taking, you know, instead of some number of different public aid programs, which rain which include.


S19: But the problem, it’s not just a formula, as I understand it. It’s also a prediction about from your past behavior. And it looks like it could change. So even if you thought anyway, that’s. Yeah.


S23: Compared to another. Just a legal question, Emily, just because I wasn’t sure I understood. So a district court had barred enforcement of it. And the Supreme Court basically said, we’re not getting to the merits of this, but we don’t want you, the district court, barring enforcement nationwide. And so we’re saying they can go ahead and do this.


S7: And there will presumably be other litigation to try to stop enforcement of it on a nationwide level, which will get to the Supreme Court, which will then uphold it anyway.


S19: Yeah. I mean, I think that is what’s likely to happen. So, yes, there have been a few court cases bubbling up. A couple of courts of appeals sided with the Trump administration. And what we’re talking about here is whether the government has the right to make this kind of rule and checked all the boxes for making the rule. You know, we’ve seen this with the travel ban and with the census. The government is getting better at just like the basic function of rulemaking, which is under the control of the executive branch. There was one district court that issued a nationwide injunction against allowing this public charge rule to go into place. And remember, this is off the preliminary stage of the litigation where all the legal arguments haven’t been fully thought through. But the judge has decide, like, do I let this go into effect? That judge said no. And that’s the order that the Supreme Court overturned by a vote of 5 to 4. There is a separate side, big legal argument going on right now about nationwide injunctions. And so Justice Gorsuch took the opportunity to write an opinion saying nationwide injunctions are bad. We shouldn’t let one district court prevent a law from going into effect for the entire country since he had the votes this time to overturn that injunction. The court didn’t reach the merits of that bigger question, but that’s also looming out there, because this notion that you can have some one judge make an order. Conservatives on the Supreme Court don’t want liberal judges in the district courts to be stopping the Trump administration from doing stuff.


S6: It’s interesting. One of the things that I obviously think this is an appalling, appalling, appalling, appalling rule and appalling rule change. And it’s it’s immoral and wicked. And one person argues that’s maybe the most economically consequential decision of the Trump era, because it is going to bar hundreds of thousands of people who would come to the United States and be economically productive citizens. And we are now preventing those those future Americans from from and their children from being becoming Americans.


S19: And and the critical. And Forbes, it was like a pro-business article, right. It was saying this is incredibly shortsighted from the point of view of American capitalism.


S6: Yes, I would say that. But actually, as I was reading about this, I was thinking, well, if I’m a judge like I can, I actually think there is. I would divide these things in two. I think this public charge, the way they’re enforcing is wrong and wicked. And I hope whoever is the president next overturns that it goes back to a different system. But I think it’s it is it is much worse to punish people who are already in the country than it is to to bar people who may who won’t ever get here. So even though it’s terrible for the country as a whole in the long term that these immigrants don’t come, I think it is it is not so immoral to not let them come. I think it’s really immoral for somebody who’s been in the country, who’s trying to make their way to suddenly change the rules on them and say, you can’t get Medicaid, you can’t get snappy, you probably can’t get the stuff for your children because you’re too scared.


S15: You can’t get Pell Grants or other forms of aid for higher education or we’re going to not actually on the list, by the way, as long as I know, I just don’t want to be spreading more confused. It’s not on the list. It isn’t on the list. But you can imagine it could be entire being nervous about it. But I just want us to be voting. False information. Sorry.


S7: So the idea of of of enforcing it for people who will not get into the country seems less bad than enforcing it on people who are here who have been living here under one set of rules or now could be completely screwed over because of decisions they’ve had to make to support themselves. It just seems that seems deeply, deeply, deeply more. All these are people who are trying to become Americans and to to alter the rules in this appalling ways. Makes me sick.


S1: We should just also the notion of taking away, especially like basic health care from people like what if people don’t feel like they can get their kids vaccinated and then we haven’t measles outbreak that is somehow tied to this? That is not that far fetched a scenario or you just have kids who are like not getting preventive dental care. It just all of that stuff is it’s really dismaying in a rich country to imagine being that just I mean, stingy doesn’t even get there.


S11: But it’s a reminder of what we’re talking about earlier, which is the power of the executive to do wide, sweeping and big things in a system where Congress can’t. You would want Congress to handle these kinds of issues because Congress represents the most diverse broad electorate of America and therefore could well, just as better is more representative. But it ain’t doing that kind of work. And so you this is a way in which both the president delivers it, just another way in which he’s delivering for those people who like him, but then also for whoever replaces him has their opportunity to use the administrative state and rulemaking and all the rest to make these kinds of change to reverse it back. So it’s just another of the primacy of the presidency and affecting lots and lots of people.


S20: All right, let’s go to cocktail chatter.


S6: When you are raising glass to celebrate my birthday, as I’m sure you will be all you listeners this weekend, what are you going to be chattering about as you toast me?


S16: John? Well, I’m sorry, I was just imagining. I was literally in my head imagining all of our listeners toasting me, and I’d forgot to I forgot to direct the custody of the nation, toast that well.


S21: And what for what? For what better reason is there to hold a toast than for David Plotz, his birth. And I think people should toast him on Twitter or send in the toast that they pay all of the length.


S16: But I think it’s a bit ironic. I don’t run it. I don’t really care about my birthday.


S22: And I don’t want to note that at David’s irony is a thing for which we toast him. Anyway, my chatter is about a piece that was written back in June of 2013 by a friend of the of the gabfests, Amanda Ripley. She wrote a piece which she updated in January of last year called Complicating the Narrative. And basically what it is, is she decided after the day after the election of 2016 that journalists weren’t covering, doing our job the way we should, that we hovered at the edges of conflict in America. Instead of doing what we should do, which is help people get some control over over conflict or at least get through that conflict. And so what she did was she spent a lot of time with people who make it their profession to study conflict, study how to get around and through conflict and use that to build better tools for journalism. I saw her speak when I was down at the Poynter Institute, and this piece is basically the written version of her of her talk and it’s about how journalism should be done. But it also has great thoughts in there about how we all communicate and also how we interpret the journalism and the conflict that’s so much a part of our daily lives. So I really recommend it. It’s on medium. It’s called Complicating the Narratives by Amanda Ripley.


S6: Emily. What is your chatter?


S24: It doesn’t have to be about me. That’s all I’m just saying. It doesn’t have to be about me.


S26: This isn’t about you. Huh? God, that’s so shocking.


S18: OK, so I’ve gotten pulled in to thinking about New York State’s bail reform law in the last week, because there’s been a lot of fear mongering about it. And some of it has centered on a case involving a woman named Tiffany Harris, who hit three Orthodox Jewish women in the street in Brooklyn and yelled something anti-Semitic at them. Then she got out without bail. And then she hit somebody else and no one was seriously injured.


S1: But this has been put forward as like this terrible hate crime. Attorney General Bill Barr actually decide to charge Harris with a federal hate crime this week, which is really upping the ante in a way that is all about politics, not law. I would argue. So this is all been kind of dismaying to see people make such a big deal out of this case. And so I was so heartened this week when one of the Orthodox Jewish women in this case, whom Harris had struck, came forward to say, I’ve been dismayed to watch politicians exploit what happened, to use it against bail reform. I want her to get treatment and not be subject to money bail. And that’s a quote from Elise maistre to The New York Daily News. And it was just such a welcome example. You know, here you are. You’re at the center of this news controversy. You have the microphone for a minute and you see the compassionate thing. Like you say, the thing that actually makes sense in the moment, that isn’t about othering the person who is on the the assaulting side of this. And for me, I think especially if felt like this moment where someone was really putting her Jewish values right out there, like you’re thinking about healing, about making the world a better place, about what’s better in the long run like this is not someone. It sounds like Tiffany Harris is not someone who has some, like deep seated violent antipathy for Jews. Sounds like someone who needs some help. And so for one of the people she hit to say that, that just made me feel better.


S6: My chatter is about the seventy fifth anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, the death camp in Poland, the Nazi death camp in Poland. Many moving stories about that come out. I was pretty taken by one in The Economist which gathered I don’t know if they gathered the data or Yad Vashem, the Israeli Holocaust Institution Museum gathered it. And it is a map of where Auschwitz is. 1.1 million victims came from. Of which about 700, 36000 have been individually identified. So it is it shows sort of literally with dots on a map where these folks were before the they were transported to Auschwitz and murdered. It’s really interesting. And it shows that Hungary in particular, was a huge source of the victims, Auschwitz, Netherlands. But that they truly came from all over Germany and Poland, of course. But they truly came from all over. And also, this is a article has a set of data about the Holocaust and Holocaust survivors. Generally, it identify it tries to count how many Holocaust survivors are currently alive, which was interesting. And so what they said is anyone who was alive in a Jew, who was alive in the region of Nazi domination during the war, who is alive today. And it’s that 400000, which is a lot more than I expected, or probably many of those were very young children at the time. And most of those half of those live in Israel. So they’re almost 200 thousand people who survived the Holocaust, who live in Israel still today. But they expect that number to of course, that will gradually go to zero. But it will go to it’s going to drop precipitously given demographics in coming years anyway. Very interesting story, listeners. You have sent us some good chatters again this week. You tweeted them to us at Slate Gabfest. And one of you, David Foreman, David Forman, e-mailed me directly with his listener chatter, which I thought was super interesting. And it’s about the secession movement that is now occupying southwestern Virginia and West Virginia. And there is a movement in West Virginia because of some of the changes in the Virginia legislature and the some gun gun limits that the Virginia legislature is passing. So part conservative parts of Virginia are proposing to secede into West Virginia and West Virginia. West Virginia’s governor and both houses of the legislature and methods have now invited counties in southwestern Virginia to come join West Virginia, which is super weird and unsettling. So check it out.


S13: It is super weird.


S6: It’s probably not possible. I don’t think states are divisible.


S1: It doesn’t sound like something that is constitutional because I don’t think you can redivide the territory that’s in the states. I think they actually like accounted for that.


S6: I don’t know. It does sort of say like, well, this would be even exacerbate our divisions, but politically. Might be better for Virginia.


S15: I don’t even know who knows. I don’t think they can do that.


S6: I don’t think it can be done anywhere to say that, although Jerry Falwell, Junior is supporting it. So I know it’s terrible. So before we get to credits, I just want to say a lot of you listened to this episode and may not subscribe to the gab fest. One of the things you could do that would really help us is to actually subscribe to the show that we will you’ll get new episodes. The second they’re published enough to go look for it, you to go find it. Just subscribe whatever place you’re listening to us. Now, you surely can subscribe to the gap. So please go do that. It is very helpful to have actual subscribers, not just one off listeners. We don’t want you one-off listeners. Mean yes, we do. We do what you want listener. But we really want subscribers.


S4: That is our show for today. The gabfest is produced by Jocelyn Frank, Rosemary Bellson, Health Care in D.C. with me and John Ryan MacAvoy, I assume helps Emily Newhaven. Our researcher is Bridgette Dunlap. Gabriel Roth is editorial director. And Jim Thomas, the managing producer of Slate Podcasts. You should follow us on Twitter at Atalay Gabfest. Tweet your cocktail chatter was there for Emily and Jon.


S27: Some nice having done that, having just on a date. Thanks for listening. We will talk to you next week.


S20: Hello closely, plus, how you.


S6: How you doing? There was a interesting kerfuffle this week following the death of Kobe Bryant. And obviously in a helicopter accident, we’re not going to talk about Bryant’s death directly. We’re gonna talk about the media story that that mushroomed out afterwards when a reporter for The Washington Post, Felicia Sanchez, and I hope I’m pronouncing your name correctly, Felicia’s on that. But I don’t actually know afam. Soon after Brian’s death was announced, she tweeted out a link to a Daily Beast story, a very good daily story from 2016 about the rape charge that was filed against Bryant back in the early 2000s. That rape charge, he was never he never went to trial for it. The victim wouldn’t testify. And then Breitman settled a civil case. But if you look at the underlying facts, it’s not a good set of facts for Bryant. It’s like there’s very compelling evidence of some misbehavior on his behalf part and possibly, you know, actual rape. But we will never be litigated. It was not litigate at the time. And so we don’t know. But but there was this quite good story about it. Sanchez having tweeted this out without comment. She just tweeted the story. I think she. I don’t think there was a comma. And he just tweeted it retweeted it was almost immediately suspended by The Washington Post by editor Marty Baron for violating washing post standards. There was a quick pressure campaign. People were. Outraged at the outrage against her, she herself was subject of a massive amount of Twitter vitriol, death threats, the usual nastiness, and the post rescinded the suspension after a day or so and she’s taken a victory lap around it. But Emily, thoughts on this?


S19: I mean, I was just so upset about The Washington Post not supporting fallacious on meds in this moment. I mean, look, I understand the Kobe Bryant means a lot as a basketball player to many people and the fact that he has this credible rape allegation in his past. Lots of people don’t want to hear about it. But what I felt like, Felicia, somnolence is doing was saying like, hey, this is also part of the record. And that seems like completely worthwhile, legitimate territory for a journalist to be occupying even right in the moment when somebody has died. You don’t have to put the complete record out there. And I just found the unfeeling nature of The Washington Post response to her to be deeply unsettling, or at least it seemed to be totally unfeeling from what we have heard from the Post. I mean, I understand that there is this like deeper, really tricky question about the presence of journalists on Twitter. And I actually thought Charlie was L for the Times this week, wrote a good opinion piece, just laying out the dilemmas. I think about this all the time. And I don’t feel at all confident or certain about what I’m allowed to do on Twitter, how it’s supposed to work. There is this real inexorable appeal of saying things that are sharp and incisive and controversial because that’s how you get more followers and attention.


S18: And as Charlie was saying, news organizations want bigger profiles for their reporters. And yet there are also these hidden lines that you’re not supposed to cross. And I don’t feel like the social media or policies that The Times or The Post or anyone has come up with really get it. The dilemmas here, or at least like they suggest that we’re supposed to be very conservative in our social media postings, which is generally what I tend to do. And then one sees lots of other reporters not handling Twitter that way and getting what looked like benefits from it. And so it’s really confusing to understand the relationship between the policy and the actual enforcement and application of it.


S8: But there’s also the general principle and then there’s the specific case here, which is the which is also a problem because, yes, I agree, the long standing question of when and how to assess someone’s life in the moment of their deaths since Shakespeare said speak no ill of the dead. Actually, I think it’s just an old light bulb. And then what responsibility journalists have in those moments, pure and separate, apart from the from the financial goals of journalism, which is to stay in business.


S11: And then there’s this. The other problem, which is, okay, let’s leave. Kobe Bryant, what actually happened this week out of the out of the conversation for just a moment in abstract terms, when you speak on Twitter, it’s context free.


S10: It’s in a highly charged. It’s basically in completely non journalistic atmosphere in which context is gone. Yeah. And so editors are gone.


S8: Editors are gone. And so it’s a difficult place to make a good point under any circumstances. And yet, on the other hand, in the pace and if you want to inform, if you want to shape the public debate, if you want, even if you do it right to help people get through conflict, which is a part of my chatter, you could imagine doing it well on Twitter and you wouldn’t want to deny your readers and the public that. But but I guess there’s this larger thing to solve, which is that Twitter is a horrible place to communicate. Anything that requires subtlety or pause or nuance. Yes. And and I that has to be wrestled width apart and separate from the Kobe Bryant that you guys think you should speak no ill of the dead. Like in that immediate I don’t think that famous as a human being is as big as a journalist.


S24: I think in general, as a journalist, it’s our responsibility. Yes. I don’t think I don’t think there is ill to speak. Yeah. I think you should be able to speak ill of the dead.


S6: I think it would be the height of cruelty for someone to go to anyone who is close to Kobe Bryant to directly convey to them in the moments after his death or even the days the months after his death, to talk to them directly about it, but to talk to the public about a public figure and to speak ill of the dead in a in a in a public way that is not specific. It’s not specifically directed towards particular human beings, even if it even if it may one day bounce back to to Kobe Bryant’s widow is is fine. It’s like. Right. It’s proper for a public figure. I don’t I think for private citizens like you, you know, that’s the. That’s a different matter. But for somebody in the public, thingor we should speak ill of the dead and but be humane towards when you’re dealing directly with those who are affected by it.


S9: And when you say that, do you mean when you’re covering your when you’re writing the obit or when you’re just a person as a journalist in the world because you’re not just. So there’s three categories, it seems to me. There’s the human category, the journalists not actually covering this beat or writing about the story. And then there’s how you covered it.


S7: So in covering the story, obviously, you write about and you write about and you contextualize it in the context of a life, as I think all the obituaries did in the human with the human being. You are you. Oh, I think someone in mourning you owe them the greatest sensitivity in the you know, giving them the tools that they need to to mourn the person they loved. And and that in that case, I would think, would be.


S24: You would never say that to Kobe Bryant’s widow. The in-between category is tricky.


S18: She is a sexual assault survivor herself. So if you want to I don’t know what you’re getting at, but like, let’s just make that she is a sexual assault survivor herself.


S6: And if you’re somebody who has interest in the subject, who has a history with the subject, who knows a lot about these issues, seems to me like you you you can wade in and you can and express an opinion and express the thought, which is what I think pushes on as did. And so that seems legit more than legit.


S1: Yeah. I mean, I guess for me. So I will say, like I thought about tweeting something very similar on Sunday afternoon when Kobe Bryant died. Like the only thing I know about Kobe Bryant is that he played for the NBA and he was very credibly accused of rape. I think in 2003, like I remembered that case, the first thing I did was to go back and read that same piece in The Daily Beast to try to remind myself of the facts. The reason I didn’t say anything was most of all, I could see that a Twitter mob was going to come for whoever did that. And I just didn’t want to be that person. Now, I don’t know if that’s you could argue. That’s just my own cowardice. But the second reason I think, John, is what you were getting at, which was that I realized even in that moment, there’s more nuance. Right. Because I’m also seeing these videos of Kobe Bryant with his daughter and thinking to myself, like, I’m not someone who wants people to be the worst thing they’ve ever done. And here’s this 41 year old man who’s the dad who has these four girls who’s been really supportive of the WNBA. Like there is more to this story of Kobe Bryant. And if I get on Twitter right now and just say, like, hey, by the way, don’t forget this rape allegation. I’m only gonna be standing for one part of it. And I don’t wanna spend my whole afternoon writing some whole complicated thread, like if unless you’re going to write the whole obit. It’s hard to see how that seems like necessarily a move that I at least want to make. But on the other hand, to stick up for Felicia San, there’s a lot of what was happening, especially on television, as far as I could tell, was total hagiography. And people just completely like whitewashing this or just saying like, oh, this, you know, rape allegation about Kobe, the charges were dropped as and that is just not a fair rendition of what happened. This victim came forward with physical evidence. It was not a he said she said the charges were dropped. Finally at the end, yes. But that is after she had been utterly hounded and mistreated for a year. And after Kobe Bryant apologized and effectively, I would say admitted that she was telling the truth and that part was just getting lost in this like Kobe Bryant fandom. And so I think that son does could have legitimately felt like she was correcting for that record as someone who experienced sexual assault herself. She wanted people who were upset about that aspect of the coverage to feel like there was someone who understood how they felt.


S11: So in that frame, she’s the she’s the corrective for the third category, not doing its job. The third category being journalists who handed the responsibility of covering this aren’t giving it the proper context of the full life. And so she’s trying to use Twitter as the corrective. The question then becomes whether that medium, knowing everything we all do about it and the way it works is just the wrong place. And then you have to judge it for to do it in two different ways. But is the wrong place, A, because you get swarmed and mobbed and therefore and you’re and whatever your point was, gets taken out of your hands. And so is it. Is it just a bad medium for that? And then to what responsibility do? One way or the other, since your Twitter ID is with an institution to that institution by using that specific medium. And then and that’s I don’t know what the answers to those are, but those seem to be two that are raised.


S1: Yeah, I think that’s a great framing of the question and a good place to end. Although as I think it always happens with this conversation, we don’t have any answers. And I’m starting to wonder if news organizations need to put out a bunch of case studies like this one and then talk them through with journalists, because the policies that are out there which say like don’t write about politics or don’t express partisan views like they’re not actually getting at these much more real life situations adequately, I think.


S9: I totally agree. And the place to go is actually the Poynter Institute. They have a huge portion of what they do is related to ethics in journalism. And that matters more than just journalists. It matters to all of us now because we all are on Twitter or, you know, Orian social media. And therefore, we all kind of have to figure out on these these questions even beyond just journalism. So and Ben and Poynter wrestles with all these things, too, as they try to help institutions write their ethical guidelines.


S20: All right, play plus catch you later, bye bye.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your slate plus membership. This episode of the Gabfest contains explicit language.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfests for January 2nd, 2020, actually wrote January 2nd twenty nineteen in my notes. It’s 2020. Happy New Decade. Yeah.


S3: Gabfests Listeners The Good Trouble Addition. I am David Plotz of Atlas Obscura. I’m so happy to be back in another decade with my dear Emily Bazelon of Yale University Law School, New York Times Magazine. Hello, Emily. Happy New Year. Hello. Happy New Year.


S4: And John DICKERSON, of course, is making New Year’s Day a five day celebration. He’s probably still, still sleeping off his his epic bender from New Year’s Eve. In any case, he’s not here. I’m sure John is not doing that. Just F.Y.I, John. I’m sure doing toplane familial and lovely. But instead, Happy New Year to Jose Duffy, writes President BPL. Joining us from Atlanta. Hello, Jose.


S5: Hi.


S3: Thanks for having me on today’s gabfest. Will the Senate impeachment trial ever happen? Then, the rising tide of anti-Semitism in the U.S. and the rising tide of weird 50 Semitism in Brett Stevens’s columns. And then the extraordinary life of John Lewis, the civil rights icon who announced this week that he is getting treated for late stage pancreatic cancer. Plus, we will have cocktail chatter. Emily, the president was impeached two weeks ago. Or was he? Well, that was a question.


S6: That’s that’s all you got for me? Does that was the question. Was he actually impeached?


S7: I think he was impeached. There is a kind of minority law professor viewpoint expressed by Noah Feldman in Bloomberg opinion column arguing that you don’t get impeached till the House actually sends the articles over to the Senate.


S1: I don’t really think this is like going to catch on. I do not totally understand the politics of this delay in that I thought the Democrats also wanted this to be over and done. Now they seem less attached to that idea and more attached the idea of, I think, exacting some more pain, because it seems like both President Trump and Mitch McConnell would like to have this over more quickly.


S7: So maybe just the fact that the Senate and the Senate majority leader for the Republicans want it to be done showed Nancy Pelosi that there was some political maneuvering to be done in holding it off. I don’t really know. I’m so tired of this part of the process. Am I losing patients for no reason? Like, was this a good holiday break we got? I can’t tell.


S4: Jose All right. Emily is Emily has already thrown up her hands and exhaustion and exasperation. So it’s your turn. Why do you think House Speaker Pelosi is is delaying forwarding the articles of impeachment to the Senate? She she ostensibly seems to be seeking leverage to call witnesses that she is using delay to try to compel or induce or somehow force Mitch McConnell and the Senate Republicans to agree to a trial where witnesses would be called. Is that really what she’s doing or is it just the delay just simply makes President Trump and McConnell more antsy? And that’s the purpose of it. Or is it there no purpose at all?


S8: I’m assuming that there’s some deeper game here that I am not privy to. That being said, I think it’s worth pointing out that like we all sort of know what this looks like in the end and we’re all just waiting for it to happen. Right. Like we know that this is that if this goes to the Senate, they’re going to vote not to impeach him. This is not going anywhere after it leaves the House. We even know that Doug Jones, like probably is going to vote against impeachment. And we’re faced with. To me, this seems like the long game here is to get the record for posterity. Right. To know that we, like the Democrats, stood up at some point when this president was doing things that we find morally reprehensible enough to to ask him, you know, to to push him out of office. It’s not actually as if he’s going to leave office. It’s not even as if this may even impact his chances at re-election. It’s. So the fact that we’re dragging it out seems unnecessarily exhausting to me among a group of people at a party and a country that is so exhausted as it as it is.


S4: So one of the things that was really striking to me, I’m now going do that thing that is so irritating that journalists do when they come back from vacation, which is they’re like, I came back on vacation and talked to people who are not other journalists or my family. And so, you know, I’ve just spent almost two weeks away from Washington in the real hinterlands of Boston and Vermont. But what was striking to me was that not a single person I spoke to, family, not family, friends, neighbors, acquaintances, talked about impeachment. Nobody that I remember when Bill Clinton was impeached. All anyone talked about was impeachment for months. They liked it. They enjoyed it with a fun conversation. It was exciting. It grabbed people. Nobody was talking about not for not against nothing. And I think that’s a that speaks to what you were getting to, Josie, which is that it is an important thing for posterity to have put this on the record, to have recorded his crimes and sins. But it actually is not winning any political battles and it’s not even engaging the public at the moment. And certainly the polling doesn’t suggest it’s engaging the public in any significant way either. And so the delay to me seems extremely confusing.


S9: It’s a great point about engaging the public because there are two different things at play here. One is, does it change anybody’s mind? And I think, like we all said, probably not. But the second is like, is anybody, even Kerry, is anybody really paying attention, like you said?


S8: Are they talking about it? It’s not even engaging anybody, which is wild when you think about it.


S10: But do you think also we just we’re all desperate for a break? I mean, I’m so tired of paying too much attention to American domestic politics. And I really consciously took a break from that over the holidays. And it wasn’t that hard. There just wasn’t very much domestic news. There was foreign news like our embassy is being attacked in Iraq and and saber rattling from North Korea. But it was actually possible not to think very much about Donald Trump and about Nancy Pelosi. And I, for one, welcomed that respite. And I wonder if you OK. Now we’re back and like, impeachment’s gonna come back and people will get some kind of second wind or at least it will be forced upon them.


S11: Do either of you think this witnesses question is important? And do you think that it’s a battle that the Democrats can win? So. So, as I understand it, Speaker Pelosi and Senate Democrats, including Chuck Schumer, wish to have Mick Mulvaney, John Bolton and several of their aides called to testify at the trial in the Senate. And that is at least superficially, what why Nancy Pelosi is withholding the articles from the Senate. Is that important?


S12: And do you do either of you think that that leverage is real leverage and they’re actually going to get that testimony?


S10: No, I can’t imagine them getting that testimony because I don’t think any of those people on to testify under oath. Right. I think that the Democrats have decided there’s some political payoff in pointing to the fact that those witnesses are missing. And that’s a choice that the Republicans are making.


S8: Yeah, this seems to me like a lost cause. And I also almost think that pushing it to the point where we can even pretend that this is a legitimate process. Right. That you’re getting any good faith engagement from half of Congress is a mistake, a political mistake in itself. Maybe it’s maybe maybe there is some sort of institutional value in this. And, you know, maintaining Norm’s value in this. It’s funny that you brought up Noah Feldman, Emily, because I’m like I never thought that all this law school education that I thought I would never actually need, I somehow need again. But I don’t know that there’s like political it’s useful politically to even keep pushing on this. And even if they got them to agree to testify, I don’t think that means we’re getting an accurate or full story about Trump’s relationship with Ukraine.


S12: Emily, do you think the courts, either at the Supreme Court level or federal appeals court level are going to compel anything from Don McGann or any of the other people who’s who have just defied subpoenas or or asked to for rulings on whether they should testify? The Department of Justice representing President Trump in kind of capacity, is his personal lawyer acting basically on his personal behalf, not really acting on the government’s interest, has been fighting at every turn to prevent any of this testimony from happening. Any documents were being produced, and the impeachment has become a kind of piece of that where Department of Justice is now claiming, well, because impeachment is happening, these Dockley these people don’t need to testify. There’s no reason for them to testify because impeachment already happened. These documents don’t need to be produced. Impeachment already happened, which raises the specter that we could get through the entire Trump administration fact. I’m pretty sure we will get through the entire Trump administration without him or his administration ever having to produce documents or witnesses that they don’t want to produce. So his tax returns, any testimony from anybody who has worked for him at a senior level, even people who didn’t even work in the administration, who are claiming some form of executive privilege for personal conversations they had with him? Or do you think that the courts are ever going to give us a judgment before President Trump leaves office?


S10: I think there are two different tracks. I think in the world of Don McGann, that being the kind of case that’s still alive about witness testimony, that’s going to take a long time. I would expect the courts to reject the administration’s claim of blanket immunity for every one and every single thing related to, you know, the White House. But then there’ll be a set of negotiations about what is actually covered by executive privilege and what’s not. And that will take time and that will get litigated and it will drag out. The tax return cases are on a faster track because the Supreme Court has agreed to hear them. And that presumably will happen before the election and in time for a ruling. So I think that it is possible that the public would learn about what’s in the tax returns before next November won’t necessarily happen, but it’s possible, whereas the other set of litigation seems to me like it’s going much more slowly.


S4: I. I really wish the Democrats would just go ahead and let this trial happen and happen quickly, even though it will be a a mockery of a trial. And we know the result, as Jose said earlier, we know what the outcome is going to be. We know what minds are going to be changed. I don’t I just think this this. Dragging out and this kind of slow motion loss of air to this whole process is not helping anybody and certainly not it’s not helping the country. It’s not helping Democrats, particularly politically, not really helping President Trump either. It’s just it’s just demoralizing. And and so I think we’d be wise both politically and for in order to engage the public in the things that that there is. They can still fight on, which is mainly the election to to shift the focus from this trial, get it done towards the election, towards the kind of enthusiasm that that the Democrats should be trying to build around the election for the House, the Senate and particularly the president. Slate plus members, you know that you get bonus segments on the gab fest and their Slate podcast. It’s a new year. Listeners, if you haven’t joined Slate plus, maybe this is the year to join Slate plus 2020 could be the incredible slate plus year. There could be something that you hear in Slate plus bonus segment that will change your life. Maybe it’s even today. But if you’re not signed up, if you’re not a member of Slate plus, you won’t get that life changing wisdom, that life changing knowledge, that life changing lottery numbers that we give out on every episode. So go to Slate dot coms, slash gap s plus and sign up today. We don’t actually give out lottery numbers. And today we are actually going to revisit some conundrums that we talked about in our live show last week, because at least I have one that I want to revise. I have a new thought. I forgot an answer to one of the questions. I just want to share that maybe Emily has something to add. Maybe Jose has her own conundrum wisdom. So come to slate.com. Such gaffes, plus to become a member to day.


S13: anti-Semitic incidents are becoming alarmingly frequent in the United States. Last week on the next to last night of Hanukkah, there was a savage, savage, brutal knife attack at a Hanukkah celebration in Mansi, an orthodox community outside of New York, apparently carried out by a disturbed man with anti-Semitic views that followed a recent murderous attack at a kosher supermarket. Also in New Jersey, suburb of New York, shootings at synagogues have become not frequent, but certainly not uncommon affairs. So we’re gonna talk about that. We’re also going to talk about the vilo Semitism of Bret Stephens, New York Times columnist, because the anti-Semitism in the fatalism, Semitism seem to go together this week. So, Emily, you and I are the fellow Jews on this podcast. Is the rise of anti-Semitism in the United States important? It’s a very small number of people who are affected.


S1: Yeah. I mean, I’ve come around to the idea that this is a more important issue than I like to think.


S10: I’ve come to that conclusion grudgingly because of the rise in the number of incidents. I mean, I tend to worry about paying too much attention to this as as one I think should worry about paying attention to any kind of violence that’s linked to terrorism because we just like get out. Our imaginations are captured at them. We pay outside it to outsized attention and we forget about all the much more ordinary incidents of violence that, statistically speaking, take more people’s lives. But I do think there’s something unsettling that’s happening here and it doesn’t have an easy explanation. And so then I find myself drawn to the explanations that are like in line with my own political beliefs about white supremacy and the kind of shaky role that Jews have had in so many different societies over centuries. When people get disillusioned and angry, they sometimes turn on Jews because of this like distinctive role that Jews play where they’re both looked down on, but then also accused of being like the global puppet masters of the universe who are controlling everything and Jews economic success. The United States then can become a kind of count against them.


S14: And I do think there is a connection between the kind of weird valorize rising of Jewish achievement that Bret Stephens was doing and that you sometimes see in this bizarre way from the Trump administration, along with, I think, the real evil being perpetuated by particular small number of particular Jews like Steven Miller in the government.


S4: Let me just jump in here and say Emily’s referring to column. Bret Stephens, New York Times columnist, wrote last week, hugely controversial, in which he tried to make an argument for the specialness of Ashkenazi Jews and their accomplishments and explain why Ashkenazi Jews are accomplished. And he was essentially making a genetic claim about Judaism that was hard to defend and that was associated with some extremely unpleasant characters. And he then had to walk back or the times and walked back. Some of the column was very confusing exchange, which ended with this column having a huge editor’s note at the top of it, disavowing a bunch of it.


S14: I mean, the attacker in Montee, New York, was this African-American man who has a pretty clear history of mental illness and might have absolutely nothing to do with any of the phenomenon that are distressing to me. How are you taking off?


S15: Well, I I think the point about mental illness is an interesting one, which is that one when I think there is this way in which when violence becomes license, when violence becomes okay, one of the ways in which it sort of manifests itself in spirals is that people who are mentally ill, who are otherwise kind of fenced in by the normal rules of society and the kind of convention society, because the rhetoric has gotten more heated, because they hear about other incidents, suddenly feel a license that they didn’t before the strictures about around that have been lifted a little bit.


S12: I mean, obviously, when you look at what’s happened, the abuses that immigrants in this country are suffering under the Trump administration and in general, the abuses that Muslims are suffering, both those who seek to come to this country, those who live in this country, the kind of continued abuses that African-Americans in particular have suffered at the hands of a extremely, you know, racist system that the Trump administration seems intent on making more racist. Those those dwarf what’s happened to Jews who remain, you know, in general, incredibly rich, prosperous, safe, accepted in society, valorize in society. But I think your point, Emily, I mean, I, too, have come around to this, that it’s that it is the canary in the coal mine that Jews are kind of a Schenectady Sinek TICKY. Is that how you say it? Sinek TICKY, yeah. For globalism. For for Edgerrin. Haitian for money for success and the attack on that and the attack that’s coming from all kinds of directions. It’s coming not just from white nationals, also coming from Islamists. It’s coming from left. From right. It’s got me some of it’s coming from the far, far left of of the Democratic Party, even in certain ways. And it kind of forms of anti-Zionism which which bleed into anti-Semitism. That the fact that all that’s happening at once is to me a sign of something really deeply rotten and unstable that is worrisome, not necessarily because Jews are being affected, but because it represents a kind of loss of of order and a loss of kind of a loss of order or loss of order. I don’t have a better word, a loss of order in society. Jose, Emily and I have now held forth at enormous length.


S8: Well, I have to say, I found what happened on the second to last day of Hanukkah really affecting because I can you know, I’m not Jewish.


S16: I’m Christian. I’m black. I understand the light like on different axes. People experience different levels of of hatred for their practices or their race or their gender. But it is so difficult for me to imagine being singled out for my religion, and I’m not particularly religious. So that might be part of it. But you know that I find I agree, Emily, that the man who committed the stabbing attack was clearly mentally ill. He had a history of mental illness. And I think the point that that there is a door open. Right, for people who are suffering from some level of paranoia that this sort of stereotype and this sort of attack has become like so much more common and accessible.


S8: And and in a weird way, I find it really disturbing.


S17: I was listening to some of my Jewish friends talk about how it makes them scared, about talking about being Jewish or expressing their own sort of religious preferences in public. And I find any time that that’s happening to any group, regardless of how much it’s actually contributing to the crime rate or like what the actual fatality levels are compared to like other forms, you know, compared to car accidents or whatever it may be, it doesn’t have to be driving all forms of violence for it to really have an effect on entire groups of people in this country. That that’s what I was thinking aloud a lot more than impeachment over the break. What kind of terrifying times we live in.


S10: Yeah. I mean, I think another thing for me about these episodes, because there was this juxtaposition of the attack on Hanukkah and then also at the attempted shooting in a church in Texas where people in the pews were armed and were able to stop the attacker. Like, of course, I’m glad they stopped the attacker. But after the Hanukkah attack and this wave of anti-Semitism, we’re also hearing about upping security at synagogues. And I understand like that that’s people’s natural response. And yet it’s just this more arming of America and diverting of resources toward guards and putting up barriers as opposed to like the things that you do to bring people together and unify them and hopefully prevent episodes like this by increasing understanding. And I whenever we take that go in that direction as a society, it just feels so wearing and counterproductive to me. But it’s like an inevitable aftermath of this kind of incident.


S9: Totally that is and that is the direction we always go in. Right. It’s like make more things illegal.


S16: Are more people put more guards at the door when the reality is, I think to your point, Emily, that like if the only way the attack is stopped is at the door because there’s someone there with a gun, like the problem is so much deeper, we’re not actually. That’s a Band-Aid, right? We’re not actually addressing the societal rot that is driving something like, you know, an increase in anti-Semitism. And it does it is really I find it just so depressing that there’s a lack of imagination among policymakers and decision makers that doesn’t allow us to actually try to even address the the deeper issues at hand.


S4: Can I make a slightly different point? I’ve been trying to get my head around why it is so. President Trump’s Semitism troubles me so much that he has this mix of 50 Semitism and anti-Semitism, which is confusing. And I think where I’ve come in a way, it’s some it’s it’s maybe a weird right wing position. I feel like I’m. I feel like I’m about to say something which would put me. Make me a conservative. In nineteen ninety five or something.


S6: So let’s see what happens. Which is hell.


S12: Which is that there is a. One of the things that I loathe about Trump is his way of seeing people as stereotypes that he absolutely puts people in groups and those groups. Represent a single stereotype, so Jews, whenever he talks about Jews, he talks about them as loving money being so sharp. And he even when it’s 500 Semitic, it’s like a file Semitism, which is just like a grotesque stereotype about what Jews are. He’d absolutely that way about immigrants, about the way he talks about about immigrants from Mexico and Central America. It’s filled with the stereotypes when whenever he talks about really whenever he talks about any group, it’s it’s a stereotype. It’s disgusting. And it’s amassing. It’s seen the group as representing some particular characteristic. That that is a cliché about that group. It’s horrible. And one of the things I always liked about the conservatism, the conservatism of of a generation ago was it was very it was very much let’s see people as individuals. And the problem with that, of course, is there are these structural things that affect people because they are part of a group. And particularly you see this with African-Americans be the number one example where you were so disadvantaged by simply having black skin in this country that you can’t not when you talk about certain issues, issues that you cover, Jose. The fact of blackness is utterly essential and you can’t not think about the group. But there is this way in which the group think of Trump has infected us in all kinds of horrible, horrible, pernicious ways. And one of the ways is that Jews like there’s this acceptance of of these stereotypes around Jews as their acceptance of these stereotypes around immigrants that that Trump puts out and and it be so much healthier if we just never thought of Jews as a group or African-American or African-Americans as a group or, you know, Mexican-Americans as a group, even though you have to in some fashion. And this is also what was so bad about Bret Stephens, his column, or one of the things it was bad about Bret Stephens, this column is this way in which like let’s look at let’s let’s look at a group and ascribe all sorts of things to that group. You know, for for some some purpose, which appears nice, but it actually has a Maleficent purpose. Ultimately, did that make any sense? I don’t know that man.


S14: Yeah, yeah. I do think it makes sense. I mean, I think you also, if you’re disposed to, you can blame the left as well as the right for. Yes. Kind of. Yeah. Emphasis on right. I mean like that’s kind of identity politics. You can ascribe blame across the spectrum and then the problem is what you were getting at. Like sometimes it doesn’t make any sense to ignore group identity, but it can have this kind of like pernicious way that it washes over us. I mean, I really liked that. A couple of tweets that Dalia Yaphe wrote about the Bret Stephens column, which she was citing her family’s experiences, Russian Jews coming to America, that like when you experience that kind of prejudice, you can either decide that you’re gonna spend your time trying to prove that, like you belong at the top of the hierarchy, you’re gonna buy into the notion that some groups are better than others. And then like go around citing this like bullshit race science as a way of justifying it, which was effectively what Stevens was doing. Or you can realize that like this kind of group based hierarchy is pernicious and disastrous and that eventually they’re going to turn on you again. And even if that wasn’t true, that you should be part of the ending of that way of thinking. And I think a lot of Jews have taken that second path. Like if you look at the Jewish liberal tradition in this country and other places, you see that. But we’re kind of making more room for thinking only of one’s self and one’s own group identity right now in America. Like that’s part of Trump ism. I worry that Bebe don’t. Netanyahu is also playing into this way of thinking as he very selfishly tries to get immunity from being prosecuted now that he’s under indictment, but also trying to run again for prime minister. And that that is just like, you know, to me that’s like anathemas the way I think about my own Jewish identity. And to see someone like Bret Stephens kind of play into that is intensely frustrating.


S18: You know, when I was reading Bret Stephens column, it’s it’s not just that it’s like pernicious and and extremely like extremely harmful to be kind of promoting this terrible race science that like bleeds into eugenics.


S16: I mean, it’s really it’s really very disgusting. I think there’s this other thing which is like it’s intellectually lazy, right, to like ascribe to like a group’s genetic trends, something that can obviously be attributed. And it’s complicated by and is attributable to like they place that certain groups have played historically in society, the access they have, they like ways that we measure intelligence, like the roles that different, you know, groups from people like Trump are are given. Historically in this country and sort of through the entire like history of the West, it’s like the idea of even being able to a centralize race and intelligence and the way that Bret Stephens tries to do, he does it poorly. But even in any sort of measure, the goal is so short sighted and so bad that I did not understand it.


S19: I know I was slightly sleep deprived. It didn’t mix, didn’t make any sense. And I’ve been on vacation. But it may knows. I literally didn’t understand it. Really. I read it twice and I just I just didn’t get it up here. I have a.


S15: I would make like a separate point about Bret Stephens, which is the. Bret Stephens is just the great exhibit for why The New York Times columns, in fact, all columns, all columnists need to be term-limited. It is absurd that tenure most eagerly tenured, their life tenured, and it’s terrible. And you end up with with them recycling terrible ideas, running out of ideas. Jack Shafer had a very good column about this. I think for excellent Politico just pointing out that they just run out of ideas and then they then they start saying either stupid things or saying the same things they’ve said 50 times. And they’re they’re basically the number of columnist who can carry out a good column for more than three years is infinitesimally small. Jack cited George Will. I would argue that Ross Douthat, that Ross is just because his mind is so fertile that he may be you know, he’s gone a little bit longer than that. Basically, everybody else, forget it. Just retire them. They get that. You give them be given five years. They get five years. That’s fine. Or maybe they get three years and the publisher can extend them a year. And that’s what they get. But the the idea that Brooks and Krugman and Gail Collins got her, she’s wonderful. And all those folks just sit on that page, which is the most important bit of real estate in an American newspaper. And just kind of say these boring things week after week is a travesty. It term limits. They all want term limits for Supreme Court justices. Make term limits for New York Times columnist, you know.


S4: And I think, Emily, you could have a column and Jose, you could have a column.


S9: Like one of the really amazing things about being a journalist, right, is that you get to be challenged. And if you have good editors, I think, and really a ton of editors and you allow your editors to engage with you. Like that’s where I’ve learned the most in any sort of educational or professional environment in my life is having an editor who says like, well, what about this? Well, you know, have you actually looked this up? Have you question this? Have you pushed yourself? And it seems to me like an extra tragedy that not only is it sort of this tenured position, but it’s also a tenured position. And it doesn’t seem to be challenged internally. And I don’t know the internal politics of the times, obviously. And I know less than probably both the other people on this podcast about the internal politics of the times. But to me, like the mere fear of writing something that’s going to be absorbed by so many people, like you said that such an important piece of real estate. And also that like knowing the influence that you have on that page, I’d be emailing everybody I know every time I publish something and hopes that someone could, you know, make it a more nuanced, richer argument and ask, have you really thought this through?


S8: And that doesn’t seem like historically that Bret Stephens has has chosen to kind of challenge himself that way, which I think has its own tragedy, no matter if every column he was writing was was sort of scientifically and intellectually sound.


S10: Well, also, our Internet culture doesn’t necessarily reward the sweetly earnest way in which you would imagine yourself calling it coming right off. Right. Right. Like, if you are provocative and a little bit Tralee or a lot trolling other people, then things whip around the Internet and you get to get a lot of attention. And I don’t know what kind of effect that has, but it does seem like it’s this part of the equation which is not particularly healthy.


S8: It’s so hard for me to imagine how this sort of failure to to make, you know, to basically do your job doesn’t get old. But I guess to your point, like maybe this is sort of the job, right?


S14: In some ways, just given the kind of culture that we live in, I mean, to me, the hardest thing about being a columnist is that you don’t write when you have something to say. You write because it’s Monday and that’s the day that you write your column. And like that is always just struck me as like a big, big handicap to walk in with the eye. I think that’s really hard and really hard to sustain.


S18: Yeah. My husband writes for New York magazine. He writes, you know, three or four times a week. And I’m always amazed that he has like opinions to still run with, which he does. He doesn’t have as many opinions as me day to day.


S9: So I’m I guess he’s saving them all for work. But I have to say, even when he writes that many times a week, he has not yet fallen back on race science. So it both seems like a hazard of the job. And like maybe some other people, it could be a favor. Yeah, plantains like paper. Right? So I married him another. It’s even the job itself is set up, a kind of set up to fail. But like you don’t have to fail like this.


S20: John Lewis announced this week that he is being treated for stage four pancreatic cancer, those a very terrible disease.


S11: Stage four is the very worst stage you can have of it. Arguably, while he is one of the last living lions, the civil rights movement, he is the last living speaker from the march on Washington. He is also arguably, I would say, the greatest living American. And so he is still very much with us. He hopefully will live many, many years longer. He is clearly suffering now. And it’s a good occasion to think about who he is and why he’s important and and why the passing of his generation is such a loss for America. So, Jose, I’m sure your admirer of John Lewis, everyone’s in March on those. But what what who is he? Why is he so important?


S17: I have to tell you, you know, I guy from Atlanta, I live here again now after being gone for about 15 years. And there has been no bigger hero, kind of in my experience, my like my periphery than John Lewis. Certainly no bigger living hero. I. He is my congressman. He was elected the year before the year before I was born. And he has. So he’s representing me my whole my whole life. And he has been a fixture, not just sort of in American politics, but I think specifically in Atlanta. He has always been so engaged in this community that he has been fighting for, you know, for 80 years now, almost. And I just think back to, gosh, time is hard to measure now. But when was it that Trump was calling Atlanta at Shithole City or whatever he said about us? And kind of just being so disparaging of John Lewis, someone who is the ultimate patriot in my head and has consistently throughout his entire life since he was a teenager, put his life, his comfort and his his health on the line. Right. For this country. It is unfathomable to me that he will that he has to experience this this disease and that he is going through something that is so tenuous and so hard to manage. But I mean, you have to stay hopeful, right? It’s the beginning of the year. We can’t lose hope yet. And I think I found it sort of relieving that he said, you know, they’re more treatment options than there ever have been. I haven’t been given a terminal diagnosis yet. And I’m going to fight this. I mean, if anybody can fight this, I want to make him out to seem a superhuman cause. He’s human like the rest of us. But if. But, you know, he’s he’s fought a lot of battles I could never have fought.


S11: It’s mind boggling what he did. He was as a teenager, he helped integrate the lunch counters of Nashville, a student, I guess, a student at Fisk. Maybe that he was doing that. He was one of the very first or he was an early acolyte of nonviolence and trained in the in Lawsons. James, Lawsons, non-violence workshops. He was on the first bus of Freedom Riders. He led the Mississippi Freedom Summer a couple of years later. He was the national chairman of Snick and was the one of the founders of Snick Organize the March on Washington. He was one of the six organizers of the March on Washington. He spoke at the march on Washington. And I think, you know, the what will probably be the first line in any history of him and first line of his Wikipedia entry. He was the kind of leader. And there are certainly the the public victim of the Selma to Montgomery march, where the attack on him in particular, as he prayed while crossing the Edmund Pettus Bridge by white police was recorded on film. His skull was fractured. The photo of his skull being fractured became an iconic photo of the degradation of what had happened in the American South and led directly to the passing of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. That is just what he did in about six years in the early 60s. It is fucking astonishing. It’s astonishing.


S5: Yeah. You know, and he the legacy that he you know, his his House seat, his congressional seat was formerly held by Andrew Young.


S17: Right. And other civil rights leader who was formerly mayor of a mayor of Atlanta and an ambassador to the U.N. under Jimmy Carter. The people who have kind of played both the inside and outside game in Atlanta, in particular in Georgia, in the south, and I think in the United States writ large have consistently and in every state, on every sort of level and every sort of way fought to ensure that this country lives up to its ideals. Right. And I think it’s John Lewis’s tenure. My grandmother, who also was at the march on Washington, was also at the Freedom Rides, you know, left her three daughters at home when there she was in her 20s to go down to Mississippi. And it makes me particularly despondent about where we are today when we’re talking about an increase in anti-Semitic attacks, when I’m talking about an increase in racism, when we’re talking about sort of the hyper partisan, low integrity nature of our current political system, to see people like my grandmother, people like John Lewis, people like Andrew Young getting older and not being able to see as clearly the fruits of their labor.


S8: It makes us so much sadder to me.


S21: Yeah, I was thinking, let us pray. A lot of other people were about a tweet from Adam, sir, about whether we’re really prepared for the passing of the civil rights generation. And, you know, for people who are younger and grew up with this touchstone, I mean, John Lewis is such an icon. When you hear him speak, there’s something so stirring about it. The history feels very vivid and present. And it’s like we’re not recovered from the ills that led to the civil rights movement. We’re not done. And so it feels like it’s not time to lose that sense of history in our midst. I also wonder about the complicated way of thinking about like what has changed and what hasn’t changed. I feel like sometimes that gets sort of flattened as we just think about this or maybe just me. And I don’t think that’s because of Lewis himself. He is someone who can talk about who’s always talked about the continuing presence of racism, but also celebrate the ways in which, like his presence in Congress, you know, and just the country has shifted like we aren’t where we were. We’re just also hot where. Right. We were supposed to get right or where we need to go. Right. And so it’s like trying to think about that all at once when you’re also just imagining this world where we lose this older generation of people who were like the witnesses and the participants.


S9: Right. It’s not to say that their efforts were for naught. My son’s to his life to is better than my grandmother’s life was at two because of things that she did and people like John Lewis did and, you know, 70, 80 years of a civil rights fight.


S16: But the fact that it feels like you’re on a downward slope almost is the thing that’s particularly scary, right. Because you sort of expect things just continually get better.


S15: What do you guys think is the way to recapture, if it’s even possible, some of that spirit of that? Generation of leaders in that movement and not necessarily would necessarily be around civil rights, it might be around climate. It might be around voting rights. It might be around Colonel Justice. It could be around any number of things. But what are there any micro movements that you see that that are developing along the same lines? And one of the things I would point out is that when you look back at the history of the civil rights movement, what’s interesting is that we tend to in the kind of gauzy, nostalgic film of history, we just sort of lump everybody together. It’s all Dr. King. And then these, you know, lieutenants to Dr. King. And that’s all. You know, like it’s ever in the march on Washington and like that ended history. But of course, it was like a movement. It was filled with a totally huge diversity of ideas and tactics and methodologies and kinds of people and and which didn’t always get along. And what what what happened was that the collective ferment and experimentation and work across different time periods and different places with different tactics was what ultimately kind of made the movement succeed. For the most part. And I wonder if you guys see that developing. And if you don’t see it developing, how could that be developed? And where if you do see developing, what subjects or what areas or what kinds of people do you see it developing in?


S1: Well, quick thing, always a mistake to forget about Malcolm X. He was just such an important strand of that movement then. But I guess one thing I worry about is climate is I think like obviously this enormous challenge confronting humanity.


S22: But it’s so slow rolling, it’s kind of designed to defeat our capacity to act with urgency because we can’t tell exactly what the shape of it is, were much more prone to bailing out people who have these like are bearing the cost now, especially in, you know, our wealthy America, like easier to just rebuild on a coastline than really rethink what we’re doing and try to marshal all of our resources to stop this. It’s that it defeats us and its slowness. And I think that to me, what feels like in this country and and internationally, the issue of immigrants right now feels like it has a lot of that urgency in terms of the way that we’re actually treating people and the lack of humanity from, you know, government actors. But it’s tricky because black Americans in the 60s were facing racism. They were citizens. No one was questioning or should have been questioning their presence here, whereas I don’t think the left has figured out what to do about the fact that, like most people are not just ready to open the borders. And so while it’s easy to rail against the Trump administration for its terrible, inhumane policies, it’s not so easy to figure out like what the boundaries are or what how you’re going to solve the whole global scale of the problem. Maybe I’m being overly romantic and nostalgic, but I look back on the civil rights movement. I think like, OK, there were just some basic principles that were pretty universal. And in the end, like one out, I mean, I think you can see that today with like the gay rights movement, with the movement to give trans people full rights, this kind of sense of shared humanity, that it’s it’s like it’s feels like a more manageable problem that we’re actually like addressing with some success in the United States. But these climate and immigration, which are to me like these enormous challenges, they just both feel vexing in a different way.


S18: Yeah, I think that’s right. I mean, the thing to me in terms of so obviously I work in the criminal justice space.


S5: And I think seeing the changes that we’ve made even within this space in terms of institutional actors in the past five or six years has been such a fast, such a remarkable change in such a short amount of time. It literally feels like whiplash and it does give me hope in the way that people’s sort of basic understandings of other people’s humanity can shift. I still think we’re not there. And that’s the problem we face in the criminal justice movement in some ways. Reminds me of the problem we face in the immigration space. Right, which is essentially well, if you break the law, you get what’s coming to you, which is sort of the narrative of people who are still justifying family separation or justifying jail does or whatever. Whatever kind of inhumane thing people are choosing to say is okay that day. The climate thing to me feels more. I mean, both completely hopeless and that like looking at Australia these past few weeks, it’s just so deeply, deeply depressing and scary. And like that there is a generation, the generation younger than me that call it kids in college right now like are really fighting this right. And are really kind of building coalitions, trying to influence policy, going out there and fighting for real. Climate change focus policy in a way that does give me hope that like even if we can’t do this, maybe the next generation can.


S12: The title I gave this episode with the Good Trouble episode, because it’s a phrase that I think is Lewis’s phrase. I know it’s lose its faith. It’s a great phrase.


S15: But I saw it all over the writing about him and I just want to pay tribute to it. Lewis describes himself or maybe he has been described as getting in good trouble. So he’s a man who was arrested 40 times, 40 times in the late 50s and early 60s. And good trouble, as I understand it, is this idea that you were going to you’re going to mess with the system. You’re going to get you do something that is going to cause you pain. I mean, literally physical pain. In Lewis’s case, he was attacked a number of times. He was beaten badly a number of times and be arrested and charged with crimes and be somebody who is in trouble. But you’re doing it in a way which is obviously noble and right and good. And I and I love that concept of good trouble. And it’s it’s really admirable. And I I wish it on more people that they find ways to get in good trouble.


S20: Let’s go to cocktail chatter.


S15: Emily, when you’re getting in good trouble. Because you’ve had so much to drink and are so valuable that you’re making change in a noble way but causing ruckus and havoc for yourself where you can be chattering about.


S10: So one of the super excellent presents my children received, luckily over this holiday was my sister Dana sent my son Simon a couple of small posters from an organization called Americans Who Tell the Truth. The person behind it is named Robert Shetterly. And it’s these really beautiful illustrations. I think they’re paintings of different figures in American life. It’s like a very eclectic collection. Everyone from like Frances Perkins to John Brown to people who are alive and well and with us today. I like Bryan Stevenson. And they come with quotes that I think Robert Chatterley has picked out that are on the pictures. And it they’re really beautiful. I imagine that they’re designed kind of for classrooms. But my kid really liked the ones he received. And if you’re just looking for art for a kid’s room or a present for a kid who’s interested in American history and curious about not famous people. Simon wanted one of Claudette COLVIN. So anyway, we we really love these posters, these small posters. And the organization, again, is called Americans Who Tell the Truth. If you’re looking for a gift, I love these.


S18: Jose, what is your chatter? So I have been thinking throughout this campaign season about Joe Biden and has the enormous kind of grief that he’s had to manage throughout his life. Right. Losing two kids, one spouse and so many years between these sort of two major incidents in his and his life. And I think, you know, thinking about his son, Beau, who who just died a few years ago, there’s a great essay in The New York Review of Books called The Designated MOURNER. And it’s by fit no tool that I just has stuck with me these past couple days that I really recommend about mourning, grief and Biden’s sort of political ideology and Irish Catholicism. It’s just so beautiful and nuanced and well-done.


S23: What does my chatter you ask? So the holidays are a time when you often have cultural jokes, but juxtapositions because you are perhaps spending time with people you don’t normally spend time with who have different cultural consumption habits than you do. And so you end up watching or listening or doing things you don’t normally do because that’s you’re you’re absorbed in someone else’s culture diet. And I had an interesting episode of this yesterday, which is that I was driving with my parents back from Vermont. I was driving them from Vermont to Washington, D.C., which is a 600 mile drive. And that’s a long time to be in a car with anybody. And my 80 something parents who are lovely people, great company. But, you know, we want to listen to music. And so your choices when listening to music, their natural instinct, when listening to music would be to listen to some boring ass classical music. And we listen to some boring classical music for a while. And Carmen listened to some other stuff. And truthfully, it’s like it does nothing for me. It’s just like a drag, especially to listen to that in a car, which is really noisy. So the musical quality isn’t very good. My choice, of course, would be to listen to like some pop or country or something, and that would not go over well with my parents might make over well with my mom. But but but dear ones, we listen to guys and dolls. I don’t know.


S24: Oh, I didn’t say. I don’t know if you guys have listened to that recently or at all. I’ve seen it a couple of times and I listened to that whole Lee Conolly. Is that an amazing, amazing, amazing set of songs?


S23: It is so good. It’s Frank Loesser. The musical. I don’t even know. Probably early 50s, I guess. I mean, I guess and it’s, you know, this tale of gamblers and and then people who are trying to stop them from gambling and the songs are so good, they are just you know, they will bring delight. They’re so clever. There’s this character, Adelaide. All of them will be very familiar to you because a person. Can you develop a cold? It is. It’s so, so good. So if you get the chance to listen to something that you haven’t listened to in a while, I strongly recommend in Guys and Dolls, it was I took the whole Jersey Turnpike. The Jersey Turnpike with guys and Dolls was the best ride on the Jersey Turnpike I’ve ever had. So check it out. And of course, we have listener chatters. You guys have sent us some over the holidays to thank you for that. You can tweet them to us at Slate Gabfest. Alex Hungerford it at AC Hungerford pointed us to a Washington Post story. Colleges are turning students phones into surveillance machines. Really disturbing story. And we know we’re always being tracked. Everyone’s tracking us. The tech companies are tracking us. Now, it turns out as someone who has a child in college, this disturbs me. I mean, I’m not like a surveillance freak, but it was weird to think that colleges are actually tracking locations and activities of the phones on that. Students are using don’t like that seems unsettling. Not a good thing. So stop doing that. Colleges, of course, they have they’re very virtuous reasons for doing it. They you know, it’s to ensure a safety, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, bullshit, whatever.


S25: Anyway, that is our show for today. The gabfest is produced by Jocelyn Frank. A researcher is, of course, Bridget Dunlap. Melissa Kaplan helped me here in D.C.. Who helped you, Emily in New Haven. Was it Ryan Mafiaboy? It is Ryan Agwai. Josie, did you produce yourself in Atlanta? I produced myself. I produced myself. Thank you to me.


S26: Josie Duffie. Right. Jose Jeffie Rice helped out with Jose Dupree, right.


S25: Gabriel Roth is the editorial director of Flight Audio to Thomas’s Maji producer.


S27: You should follow us on Twitter at at Slate Gabfest for Emily Bazelon and Josie Duffy Rice. I’m David Plotz. Thanks for listening. We will talk to you next week.


S23: Hello. Slate Plus, how are you? Good talk. Long time. Haven’t seen you in a while. Yes, I know. I put on weight over the holidays. What’s it to you, friend?


S13: So here’s the here’s the brief for us today. Jose, I hope you can find a way to participate in this. But I propose that we revisit some of the conundrums. I predict we want to revisit one of the conundrums that we talked about in our Oakland show, because I remembered I have to show that I actually had a much better answer than the one I gave. So I wanted to to do that. But Emily, were there any conundrums that you have in mind to revisit? Revisit?


S14: No. I want to hear yours because you sound like you’ve really been thinking about this.


S12: All right. Well, it’s just that I realized that I had a story. So there was a question, a conundrum that was posed, which is what is the most awkward what is most awkward work situation to have to get yourself out of? And I had talked about being on a conference call and like, you know, being being on a video conference call. I’m forgetting your own video and like doing all sorts of unseemly things while you’re on video, but forgetting that you’re on video, but actually had one that was so much more embarrassing than this. Emily, I probably told you the story. But maybe you’ve forgotten it.


S14: Can’t wait to be reminded.


S28: And Jose, so many seek your guys’s response about what what the way I should’ve extricated myself. So I’m going to blur some of these details so as not to identify and identify the people involved. A few years ago, I had occasion to one of the things I do for Atlas Obscura is that I pitch Atlas Obscura as the CEO. I go out, I raise money or pitch projects to people, and I sort of have to talk about Atlas and try to get somebody who is in a position to do a partnership with us or invest in us or do something else with us to get them excited about this. And so I do a lot of pitching and sometimes good at it. Sometimes I’m bad at it. Sometimes it works. Most the time it doesn’t. In any case, I had a I was I had a pitch that I needed to do. And it was with was with somebody who I didn’t know I’d never met before. A woman who is about my age. And usually I’m pitching guys because in general, the like, one of the dismal facts of certainly a venture capital or investment that the men control the capital. So I’m more often have pitched guys, but this was one of the one of the infrequent occasions where a woman was the decider who I was pitching. And so we were sitting in a conference table at her office. And there are a couple of other people in the room. But it was basically a conversation between me and her. And I was sitting across a conference table that was maybe, I don’t know, three feet wide, two feet wide. I’m a relatively tall person.


S12: And we were having the conversation. I was pitching. It was I was killing it. It was such a good pitch. I was doing so well. She was so on. She was like, engage. She was so excited about this project. We were talking about was definitely going great. I was like, this is I got this aced. And I’m a slightly fidgety person. Like, you could see me now. You could see me sort of gesturing. I’m slightly fidgety, gesturing person. And one of things I do is like kind of tap my legs and tap my feet a little bit. And so I was tapping the table leg throughout this pitch and tap tap, tapping the table, leg.


S3: And, you know, maybe half an hour into the meeting, I realized, oh, shit, that’s not the table leg.


S29: I didn’t see that coming. The question is, how do you go now?


S6: What did you do? Well, I’m just going to ask you. I guess I’ll tell you what I did by what you did, you were you guys to tell me what I should have done. I think so would you have had it? No. Go ahead, go ahead. No, no, no, no, please. I want to hear your thoughts about this. I was just thinking about what I would have done, I’m sure.


S9: I think I would have. I’m sure your face showed the registration of realizing it’s her leg and the horror and then saying, I’m so sorry.


S17: I thought this was the table like this whole time. I mean, what else can you say?


S8: You can’t play it off like this was fine unless that’s what you did. In which case, I guess you can do the.


S14: How do you stop right in the moment or do you feel like you have to wait? So it’s like it’s hard to stop what you’re doing in the moment and in front of sweet. How many people were in the room?


S26: There were two other two other people in the room who were not gay.


S14: Right. So it’s not just you and one other person that makes it, I think, harder to acknowledge. Like in front of everybody what’s happening as opposed to trying to apologize for it later.


S12: But okay, here’s here’s what here’s the whole thing that made it so weird is that obviously what was weird about it was that she was enjoying that she was not bothered by it.


S8: Those are true. If I had been probably a she. Yeah, maybe she didn’t want you to feel.


S28: That’s right. That’s a fair point. That’s a fair point. I guess my read because of how how kind of like lively the conversation was, was that she was like she was totally engaged. And then she was digging my pitch and then digging the fact that I was like weirdly playing footsie with her. I don’t know.


S1: Maybe she wasn’t well and she didn’t pull back, which she did not pull back.


S19: I know she’s not full. Yeah, and she hadn’t called attention to it, but he’d been going on for a long time.


S29: Oh, man. It was, huh? It was so unsettling. It was so. So what did you do?


S6: What I did. Well, you must have stopped. I.


S26: I did exactly what I did exactly what you guys describe, which is that I was what you could see her like a clearly red. My face was like, oh, shit. I think I said, oh, shit. That’s not the table leg. That’s your leg. I’m so sorry. Oh, no.


S6: But, you know, it was good that you just called yourself out.


S15: No, but it’s like. But it drew attention. So I think what the proper move would have been with GIBI just to stop doing it and not draw attention to it, because that that that made it that drew attention to the fact that I was horrified by my own actions, which she had not found horrifying. Right. And so that made it seem like that that it made her seem like made her. Maybe made her feel bad. My drawing attention to it might have made her feel bad.


S29: So what happened with the patch? Yeah, it went totally went south after that. See, that’s interesting.


S19: And there isn’t.


S14: Didn’t know you had that covered. Now your acknowledgement of that awkwardness. You’ll never know what would have happened instead.


S28: Well, I think it’s probably an overreach to say that that was what caused the pitch to go south. I probably had not persuaded her. And she was. She’s a very accomplished person who had, you know, achieved great success in her profession and I think probably had good judgment. So I doubt that she would have kiboshed a deal that made sense to her just because of some awkward, awkward footsie.


S26: But it was definitely it definitely was weird. It definitely was weird. But I came out of the meeting. The person I was with was like, man, the date. That was some weird energy in that meeting.


S19: So I love this stuff. This is a good one. It was the most awkward work situation I’ve ever actually had to extricate myself from it. I don’t. I didn’t do it right.


S14: Can I brought in this? You know, it also makes me think about it’s just all the moments where you have a choice about whether to admit that you’ve screwed something up or to admit there’s some awkwardness. And like sometimes it’s the right thing to do, but not always the right thing to do. Like this happens to me a lot with when I forget someone’s name and I’m trying to get away with having forgotten their name. There’s a moment where you have a choice where you can just say, I’m really sorry, but I forgot your name. If you can make it past that moment without doing that though, and get away with that, it’s so much better.


S1: And I’m always torn about what to do in that split second.


S28: That’s a good question. I don’t know the answer.


S9: I’ve never handled that right. I can probably tell you what not to do. It’s like 30 different levels of what not to do. But I have not yet figured out how to like be smooth in situations where you have, especially when you like, used a slight wrong name. Or you, Paul. God, I hate it. So yeah, it’s so.


S1: Yeah, I don’t think it is. I wonder sometimes if I’m exaggerating how bad it is. Like the other day I ran into someone right near my house. So I’ve met like multiple times. I totally know she has. And I said her name when I said hello. Cause like I just knew it and she had no idea who I was in that second. Like she probably remembered afterward. And I and but you know, she’s just said hi. She didn’t say my name back. And I just could tell I had like caught her unawares out of context. And I thought to myself, like, that’s so nice to see. So like, I should just relax and not think it’s so important to people whether I remember their name.


S14: But right. Because you don’t feel super. How know you don’t feel like super hurt by that.


S7: No. But then you do realize there are moments in which it would be bad. And I do think my awareness of this has become so heightened living in a small city like when I grew up and thought Alpha, I never like whatever was a big city red. You saw people who didn’t know all the time, whereas like New Haven, that just happens.


S4: I don’t care when nobody. When people forget my name. I don’t even care. So I sort of feel like that there should be. That should be a d.m.c like dispensation for everyone on that score.


S12: Yeah. You know, people like whatever, they get flustered. The plane that was playing in one of these speed games with my kids last night and some other kids, which is a game where you have to pull something out of your memory. It’s called a Nomi. It pulls something out of your memory really quickly before somebody else, your kids competitive. And one of the people playing just got so flustered that she could never you know, you’d have to say something like Michael Jordan or up a toilet plunger. And it’s. But would she get flustered? She could just say her own name. Cute.


S26: She just could do is say her name because she got so agitate.


S23: People get flustered and you just have to be forgiving. It’s under all circumstances that had nothing to do with anything. But it was a nice discussion. All the same play.


S6: Plus it’s okay. Yeah.


S20: By Slate plus.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for September 26 2019.


S3: I would like you to do us a favor Ed.. How could it be titled in any other way. I am DAVID PLOTZ About with Obscura. I’m here in Slate DC.


S4: John Dickerson of CBS 60 Minutes joins me from CBS his radio studio. Hello.


S5: John good morning. How are you.


S6: Well that’s like a super 60 Minutes a portentous CBS newsy voice. You can do better than Barack you can be a casual casual Dickerson. Emily is absent this week. But that’s OK. No worries we have Kirsten Powers who is of course a CNN political analyst and USA Today columnist and and frequent gab fest host sub host in although Pierson I realize we’ve never met so you’ve never Palin you’ve always said for me apparently.


S7: I think where we I think maybe we’re were when we were on we’re in another place so I only saw you far away. Yes. I’m very happy to be sitting here.


S6: Well she’s now she’s now in Washington. We are sharing an extremely humid and hot studio but we’re both wearing very short sleeves very summer class. So it’s OK on today’s cap vest. Well guess what we’re talking about. We’re into a double dose of Ukraine and impeachment for a first thing that we’ll talk about the substance of what’s happening in this incredible Ukraine affair that is breaking instantly breaking as we speak. And then the second part of that discussion we’ve got the politics of impeachment to Nancy Pelosi’s move to start an impeachment inquiry and then further topic we will talk to Jodi Kantor the co-author of she said the incredible new book about her and make into his investigation of the Weinstein affair and the ME2 movement. Plus we will have cocktail chatter the Ukraine whistleblower scandal is moving so fast and so so sinuous Lee. The facts may have changed dramatically by the time you hear this. As we tape man as we tape I think the DNI the acting DNI Acting Director of National Intelligence is testifying before the House. This morning the House released the whistleblower complaint which I think Kirsten you have print is that I didn’t have it printed out in front of you yesterday. God was only yesterday the White House released a sort of transcript or quasi description of the July 25th call between President Trump and Ukrainian President Vladimir Vladimir. I don’t know. I mean I’m just gonna mangle it. Vladimir Zelinsky in which Trump pressured the Ukrainian to start an investigation about whether Joe Biden had interfered in Ukrainian legal matters to protect his own son and urged Zelinsky to confer with the attorney general and his personal attorney Rudy Giuliani.


S8: Giuliani about this that call the whistleblower complaint that goes into how that call was covered up. It all has echoes of mob shakedown. And of course there’s the mystery of this President Trump freezing 391 million dollars and a that Congress had had specified for Ukraine. And the reason he froze that aid is not yet clear anyway. There’s so much happening so much so much so much so much happening here it. I hesitate to to ask you to characterize this but insofar as you can see this landscape right now what is scandalous about what’s happening and what isn’t not necessarily what is impeachable what is scandalous.


S9: There’s a lot that’s scandalous about it. I think that first of all it’s never happened where you have a president going to a foreign government asking them to do an investigation to help you get re-elected. And and really blackmailing them right using foreign policy a foreign aid to them which there’s really no other reason you would withhold that aid at this point. I mean the whole point of it is to try and help them protect themselves against Russian aggression.


S10: So surprise surprise also Donald Trump did something that helps Russia. So there’s there’s just that is almost interestingly a side story of this. And then for him to have done this the the lying about it in the press conference yesterday and but now on the whistleblower whistleblower report we find out that they actually went out of their way to cover this up. So they they went out of their way to take the notes from the that the call and put them somewhere where they wouldn’t be found basically. So if you’re not doing anything wrong why or why are you covering it up. And so I think that it’s I’m actually not somebody who’s prone to hyperbole or getting over overly outraged even during the investigation over the Russian collusion. I was always a little dubious that they were going to find any kind of smoking gun. There is a smoking gun here even without the whistleblower whistleblower report. Rudy Giuliani has already said publicly that this was what he was doing. They were strong arming the Ukrainians to investigate something and then the last thing I would say about it is what makes it even more scandalous is that Biden didn’t ever do the thing that they claim that he did and that they want investigated and nobody who has even read for five minutes about this thinks that he did.


S11: John I mean if you want to answer that same question I answered Why do you. My question is sort of why do you think that’s captured the imagination of Democrats in a presidential critics so quickly.


S12: Well the tender was in the it was in the field which is to say there was already pressure on the House Speaker Nancy Pelosi to do something. She was and this is pre Ukraine. This is just based on the president already and she was doing a pretty good job recognizing that the country is not made up of the same political makeup as the Democratic caucus. One of the things we’ve seen just from a straight up political standpoint I know we’ll talk about that in the second section but is the movement of a lot of Democrats in the House who are in purple districts or districts that are that are more politically risky than the safest ones. So that gives you some sense of how the political landscape has changed.


S13: But I think that one of the things is that this all happened quickly. It’s quite easy to understand it’s quite cinematic. And there is a summary of a phone call that is pretty close to a transcript and so you have a lot of elements here. And by the way this the president is at center stage in the collusion matter.


S14: It was always it was always the president who is at the center stage of the obstruction question but not collusion and and the obstruction question was kind of fuzzy it up by. Well he you know this is a guy who’s new to politics he doesn’t know about all these funny norms and all of this. This phone conversation happens a day after Robert Mueller testifies. So among the many things about this story is that it’s a failure of near miss learning near miss learning is when you almost crashed your car and then realize I’m going to put my phone down and not check it while I’m driving here the president after a two year investigation into whether there was any foreign influence in an election solicited by his campaign is then on a phone call in which that seems to be what he’s doing. And just to go take listeners through if they haven’t read the transcript the president starts out this conversation by saying the United States has been very good to Ukraine. I wouldn’t say that it’s reciprocal necessarily. OK. So he raises the idea that the United States has been much better than Europe in helping Ukraine but it hasn’t been reciprocal. The president of Ukraine who is very well versed and briefed in ways to kiss up to President Trump including using his same language and all of that asks for some additional missiles and military help and the president instead of talking on this phone call about anything having to do with the principal issues of national interest. Which of which there are several. And with respect to Ukraine and if you want to read about them the Director of National Intelligence has put a threat assessment together of the threats facing United States there’s a big chunk in there on Ukraine. None of that gets discussed. Instead the president goes right to two things one the question of a server that might be in Ukraine which is related to the Clinton election 2016 and then and then Joe Biden. And so he basically says this relationship is not reciprocal. And then names two things he’d like to have the president of Ukraine take care of for him. And then finally I think it’s worth going back to this idea of of a cover up as Pearson said a lot of the original defense of the president was including the president’s own defense of himself was oh there’s a perfectly fine phone call nothing wrong with this. That’s why we can release the transcript but if the White House officials and there were apparently according to the whistle blower report maybe a dozen on the call. If they if it was such a non you know a nothing burger of a phone call Why did they get so concerned as the whistleblower tells us about the call and then try to basically hide it. This is before this is ever public. Nobody knows about the call in other words not to hide something that has burst open and has become a political thing. But this is after the call takes place and nobody knows about it. They think it’s so bad that they have to put it in this system about which we’re learning now which is some kind of extra special system not for national security purposes based on what we know so far but basically to disappear things that the president has said on some of these foreign calls that are a problem and we don’t know the nature of the problem but we know that the whistleblowers said in the beginning of the complaint that the concern is the president is using the power of his office to solicit interference from a foreign country in the 2020 U.S. election.


S8: Right. I want to point out one important thing is we refer to it perhaps during this conversation is the transcript. This is not a transcript there may well be things that are that are missing here. And and this this way may well be bold arised in a way that is beneficial to the president so let’s not let’s also not take this as being hard to see hard to see how it could be worse.


S15: Hard to see how it could be good for me. It’s pretty good that the summary of the phone call is pretty awful.


S8: Well they could have cut stuff out of it. One thing that that I just want to connect this to. There is also this letter from the New York Times A.G. Sulzberger this week about ways in which the administration had made the life of the press difficult and there is an example which is it’s kind of eerily parallel here which was the Times got wind that the Egyptian government was going to arrest a Times reporter in Egypt. The Times sort of tried to bring this to the attention of the Trump administration Trump demonstration didn’t care administration in fact was in effectively encouraging the Egyptian government to arrest a American reporter working in Egypt American reporter working for an American newspaper. Another example of this administration colluding with a foreign government against what they perceived to be political opponents. And that’s genuinely genuinely chilling. It’s genuinely disturbing the idea that you would you would as the president of United States as the administration not seek to protect American lives American interests even if they’re people who are who might be your opponent and instead work with nasty foreign governments this is awful the actions that are inspired by the impulsiveness or the signal sent from the president this this process of of what we’re learning about this covering up and putting into these secure servers is created by the behavior of the president.


S12: So you have people acting on the things that he does you see the contagion I guess is the. In other words that a lot of the defense of the president over the course of his time has been well these are his idiosyncrasies and they exist kind of only in him but the institution around him is off doing. You know basically the country’s business what what is at issue here is a whole system that is created to basically cover up for at least what we’re learning now those those problems and carrying out in Egypt and other places the president’s wishes.


S8: PEARSON One odd aspect of what’s going on here is is Rudy Giuliani is the president’s personal lawyer. He is not anyone who has been appointed to any office not confirmed by the Senate. He is the president’s personal lawyer and there’s this commingling of the president’s personal legal interests and personal financial interests and personal interests and being re-elected and the public interest and that it appears from a story I remember the supposed story or time story now that there was this shadow foreign policy that that Giuliani was helping to orchestrate against the interest of the National Security Council against John Bolton who was sidelined from this against the entire State Department being sidelined the ambassador to Ukraine being sidelined and that you have effectively Giuliani acting as the president’s lawyer counsel Gary carrying out a foreign policy and the the people who have been designated by the various you know by the administration officially to carry out that foreign policy emasculated from it. What do you make of it.


S10: Well yes I mean and that’s something that has caused a lot of concern and that’s also in the whistleblower report that there is this concern about this freelancing and I do. I you know Giuliani technically is his lawyer and putting that kind of an air quotes because he’s really not lawyering right. He is he is a political hit man for Donald Trump and he just basically goes around to sort of trying to do his bidding politically. And so I think that they have inserted political interests in place of what the national interest would be the whole idea of what they’re asking Ukraine to do which is to investigate Joe Biden for something that didn’t happen and it’s basically the idea is that somehow he was protecting his son from investigation when in fact what he was doing was the opposite. He was basically trying to get a prosecutor fired who wasn’t prosecuting. And so it’s the opposite is which makes me wonder are they just asking Ukraine to manufacture information because if they were to go forward and look into what he’s asking them to look into they know perfectly well that the prosecutor that Biden was complaining about wasn’t prosecuting anybody that was the problem. So that’s what I feel like they’re doing. I feel like they’re basically putting on Ukraine to say like you need to come up with some information that’s going to help me get re-elected in the same way they want the Ukraine to somehow you know convince everybody that they were the ones that were meddling in our election and not Russia.


S11: Before we move on to impeachment John I just want to turn back to the transcript or the quote unquote transcript of the phone call and one of the things that you hear from some of the Republican defenders of the president right now is is oh there is no quid pro quo here why is that. Is that a reasonable standard is that true or is that just a that’s just a very convenient way to read something where there’s obviously a quid pro quo happening it’s just not it’s just not spoken explicitly like here’s what you’re going to do. Corruptly so that I’m going to get this criminal benefit.


S13: Yeah. Well you know the idea of the quid pro quo. First of all it doesn’t have to be a quid pro quo. Impeachment is shaped by the articles they choose in the debate. And while it’s got legal aspects in the Senate it is obviously there’s politics and there’s there’s some greyness here so but it needn’t be the case that the president says if you do this I will do that. But what he does is pretty close to that anyway by saying we’ve given you a lot. The relationship hasn’t been reciprocal I’d like to ask you a favor. I mean that’s his bout is usually the people are more clever than that. That’s actually quite clumsy and it reminds me of the the quote attributed to Henry the second with respect with respect to getting rid of Thomas Becket and one of the versions of that quote comes is Will none of these lazy insignificant persons whom I maintain deliver me from this turbulent priest. And the reason I like that better than the usual one which is Will no one rid me of this turbulent priest is that it contains that idea of these people around me whom I maintain. In other words who I give you all these things too and there’s no reciprocity which is exactly what’s in this in this phone call. But I think more to the point I mean the president whose key job is national security. This is not in the national security interest in the United States. He’s putting his personal lawyer who is not elected by anyone or even confirmed by any body of elected people in on this. This job. The attempted use of his prior of his office for private gain is seems to me to be sufficient. But now you’ve got this question of whether there were others in the White House and again I’m struck that the whistles whistleblower says there were a dozen other people and the whistleblower report it should be remembered was put together by without firsthand listening to the summary of the phone call. Why is that important. It tracks with the actual summary of the phone call which the whistleblower has not seen which means the whistleblower was in contact with enough people that the whistleblower could put together an accurate description of what took place on the phone with. Which means a lot of other people know that this exists which means there are other people who can testify to the president doing this and not only testifying to doing it but to their concerns people who work inside the White House not Democratic hacks to their concerns that he was doing precisely what the whistleblowers concerned with him doing and as a result went then and took these cover up measures. There’s plenty here without there having to be the kind of quid pro quo that would that would never really happen probably in real life anyway.


S8: Slate Plus members you get bonus segments on the gab fest and other Slate podcasts and today if you’ve got a slate that complex gab fest plus and you become a member today you’ll get to listen to our segment on Reddit tune Berg. The 16 year old Scandinavian climate activist why does she make so many people so angry and also why is she so wonderful and mesmerizing. We’ll talk about her inflate. Plus let’s turn to the politics of the Ukraine scandal. So on Tuesday afternoon House Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced that she would or that the House would open an impeachment inquiry something she had long resisted. There is now according to various counts done by various media outlets. There is a majority of House members who support this inquiry which is not surprising there’s a House Democratic majority no Republicans seem to report it. The Senate which would have to convict the president if if he were impeached by the House is of course still controlled by Republicans does not seem likely at this moment that that could be removed from office by Mitch McConnell controlled Senate. But I guess stranger things have happened. I can’t really think of them but perhaps here’s what made Nancy Pelosi change her mind. Why did this affair break the camel’s back after so many other straws had been piled on that poor camel.


S9: I think because the moderate members that she was trying to protect basically came out and said we want to move forward with impeachment. And so I think that I think that that hurt her concern always has been protecting her majority. Right.


S8: Why did they want one the moderate members changed their mind.


S9: Well they say they changed their mind because this is what they were sent to do. You know it is to stand up and protect the Constitution and the rule of law. And I think that this is a more open and shut case it’s a less confusing case and it’s. And I think the looking at the the Russia investigation you know there wasn’t there was just was a lot of disagreement in the Democratic caucus about whether or not this rose to the level of impeachment and even if it did that it would probably harm Democrats. Right. If they went ahead with it I think that this is so open and shut and so obvious that it would be almost impossible for Democrats to look away and not do something about this.


S8: John at the moment the polling suggests that the American public at least is not particularly interested in impeachment. I think there’s a fairly strong I like for 37 to 57 against polling numbers about impeachment. Do you think that is that’s an artifact of these polls don’t really take into account what’s happened with Ukraine or do you think that that reflects kind of a public that just doesn’t want to decide things this way and would rather just not have to think about this and get get to an election maybe.


S12: I think probably but I think both and also a all of public that’s worried about other things in their lives and and puts this in the category in part because there’s been so much both real and hysterical coverage of the last two and a half years that there’s there’s a fatigue and also a kind of like Wake me when this resolves feeling out there. So I think there’s probably a mix of of things. And also you haven’t had this has followed up though the though we should you know it’s absolutely clear as everything we’ve said points out that this is new and extraordinary and different from the past. However anybody who’s not paying attention to it too closely hasn’t seen the kind of things to make it to distinguish it particularly in other words. Yes you have more Democrats were in favor of impeachment but that’s not surprising. What you don’t yet have in this is Republicans who are not rallying around the president. There’s a lot of rallying around the president. You’ve had a few comments by you know Mitt Romney says this is troubling in the extreme but essentially this is sorting roughly along the lines of all the previous things that have never happened before. And so for anybody who’s who’s not paying super close attention they’re not yet seeing a charismatic dissenter from the Republican Party say we should go forward with impeachment and here’s why or anything that really breaks the traditional way of sorting these things.


S10: I also think that there was sort of an argument before that an election was coming up and so therefore rather than impeaching you let you let the American people decide what this is showing is that that Donald Trump is taking steps to impede that election. Right. So that does change the dynamics a little bit. Whereas before it wasn’t as cut and dry. There were these accusations but it wasn’t it wasn’t just right there for everybody to see.


S11: That’s an excellent point. Do you think Kirsten that Trump wants to be impeached. Ross Douthat had an interesting column about this. And I think that the case I’ll just lay out the case for why he might want to impeach one is that it has Democrats doing something with basically at the moment unpopular rather than doing things that are popular like focusing on some sort of protection of health care or raising the minimum wage or or other things that that the public might be excited about. Another is that he loves the circus. He just he’s been at the center of attention. He just thrives on being at the center of attention. And then third I think maybe he just priced in the idea that the actually it’s always a mistake to attribute any kind of long term thinking to Trump but that he might recognize that the half life of all this stuff is so short these days that that even if today we’re thinking about you know this is the hugest story. He will surely be impeached that by next week. It will be overshadowed by some other nonsense.


S10: Yeah. So the way I thought this immediately actually what I what I don’t know is is this conscious or unconscious. But he has some sort of desire and it could be entirely unconscious to to to a always be the victim always be being persecuted by the big mean Democrats because that really resonates with his base as well because there is there’s a sense of agreement. Right the Democrats are persecuting us because we’re Christians the Democrats don’t like us because we’re conservative. All this kind of agreed meant politics and so it definitely feeds into that. I also don’t think that Donald Trump’s functions very well in an ordered society. He needs it to be disordered. Right. And so he loses if it’s ordered. And so he has to create chaos and as all demagogues do. And so I again. And whether it’s conscious or unconscious I can’t say I just know that he is driven to do this and that on some level yeah he wants to be able to say oh look at Democrats they can’t do anything they just are driven by hate. They’re just coming after me them and the fake media and that’s sort of a storyline that works well for him. And and people say well he should just be running on the fact that the economy’s good or whatever other accomplishments he allegedly has. It’s like obviously he doesn’t think that that’s how he can win. He thinks he can win by acting like this.


S12: Here’s where we have where he faces a challenge is that that portion of his electorate from last time who didn’t like Hillary Clinton and thought they’d rolled the dice on him suburban suburban women Republican women in particular are not. If somebody like John Bolton comes forward and says Yes we couldn’t get our Ukraine policy off the ground because of this fixation the president had on on the Bidens or some other person comes forward who is in the traditional Republican Party who is not an ever jumper necessarily but if this with the process of bringing witnesses forward with the process of of you know John Kelly still out there John Kelly remember when he left the office said someday the world will.


S14: He didn’t say exactly this but he talked about all the things he kept the president from doing. Is that the kind of material that’s in this secret server by the way one should stop and meditate for a moment on the fact that it appears there is a White House it’s kind of off the books server in which some of these conversations were disappeared after we just had an election in which still at Hillary Clinton’s server was such a big deal.


S12: But I think there are other people out there who the portion of the Republican electorate that’s not in the president’s most base of bases that could appeal to them on national security grounds which is separate and apart from the usual Democratic kind of being baited by the president falling into the trap that we’ve seen in previous scandals from the administration. One of the things that has me.


S4: Puzzled is from a I think from a Washington perspective what’s going on. What we’ve learned so far is truly truly disturbing.


S1: You have the manipulation of the political system you have this file the president using using the power of his office to to bully a valued ally for personal gain in order to distort the upcoming election. You have the abuse of an ally in a disturbing way. You have the undermining of Congress. Congress has allocated this three hundred ninety one billion dollars for Ukraine and the administration has decided not to give it in order to to get some sort of advantage for itself which as a member of Congress I would be really peeved if that happened that I’ve done something and then the administration is preventing it so I can understand why this would be extremely unnerving. If you are Abigail Spann Berger and your moderate House Democrat or your you’re Mitt Romney and your Republican senator in this sort of destruction of the legislative power and this undermining of the principle the basic integrity of the of the system. But are Americans in general going to be actually interested in this. I don’t know. I’m worried about that.


S10: Well I think it’s historical analogies only go so far just because our world has changed so much. But if you look at Watergate most people really weren’t that interested in it until they had the smoking gun. And then you start to see people you know in the tapes basically came out. Then you started to see people shift a little bit so that so the argument I think for Democrats has always been you do the investigation and you have to bring people along right that you’d like out of the gate they’re probably not going to be that interested.


S1: But the other the other part of that next I mentioned both of your takes on this because you’re both such members of your deeply card carrying members of the media. There is a partisan media today that there wasn’t really during Watergate. And there is a counter narrative that will unless Fox somehow has some bizarre change of heart not going to happen. It’s not going to happen. There will always be a story a countervailing story that people who want to support the president are always gonna be able to hang their hat on. And so I’m not sure that the ability to move significant chunks of of conservative America or even any chunk of conservative America or any conservative senator exists in this in this media environment and therefore I’m not sure that you can project what happened in Watergate happening here right.


S10: And I think that that’s to John’s point which is I don’t think he would move conservatives. I think he would move the voters the Democrats would move the voters potentially John was talking about.


S12: Right. Different from our Watergate. We don’t we have a re-election coming here that Nixon didn’t face. Nixon already been re-elected. So. So the one thing is whether impeachment goes. You know we as First we have to have actual vote on articles and all the rest and has to get to the Senate. So a lot will happen between now and then. But then you know that doesn’t happen. This has a political effect. And the political effect may just be if it was for a certain kind of Republican voter I love what he did on taxes I love what he did on judges he has changed the culture of America for 40 years locked that in. Wow.


S13: That’s fantastic. And a lot of regulations are now gone. He’s done good work. Let’s send him to his retirement. We don’t necessarily need four more years of this. He’s gone. He’s done good irrevocable work. That can’t be fixed by a new even Democratic president. So I think that that’s a possibility for a certain number of Republican voters. With respect to impeachment if we play up the drama a little bit more everything you say David about the power of the Republican base which participates in primaries that can really kick Republican senators out of office. You do have some people who are retiring Lamar Alexander is retiring. You do have Mitt Romney who is a long way from an election and is a little bit more encased in protection from the base of the party. So you and then you could probably get to the three or four that you would need. I think the calculation for other Republicans if we if this goes down the road and continues to be real as opposed to a fever dream other Republicans then have to somebody like Ben Sasse for example who’s been critical of the president has to make a determination whether in the end this is going to get so bad that you will for him all time be associated with not standing up to something. Now on the other you know on the other hand let’s say goes the other way and you stood by the president when everybody was calling for his head and it turned out to be nothing. Well that’s that’s a route to glory too. But in this scenario that I’m playing out it gets all the way to the Senate and seems legitimate. You have to have you can imagine one or two and it doesn’t get a lot of Republican senators saying for all time I want to be on the right side of this story. Again that’s under the theory that this is you know continues to be very bad for the president.


S11: One of the things that that I’m interested in is we’ve had administration and one of the things that some people think the president should be impeached for that has resisted at every turn turning over documents allowing people testify they have prevented investigations prevented testimony from the House Democrats. And now if there is an impeachment inquiry there will be significant demands for I don’t know if they’ll be demands for tax returns but there would be demands that that officials testify and the documents be turned over and so far this administration has refused to do it. How do you think that might play out. I mean are they going to continue to hide everything behind this national security cloak will they get away with it is the Supreme Court going to involve itself with the Supreme Court ever ever give the Congress the benefit of the doubt here. What do you think.


S9: I mean I assume it’s going to continue to play out the way that it has played out in that the administration is going to make things as difficult as possible and when they do testify it’ll be the way Corey Lewandowski testified where it just turns it into a circus. And and it makes it look like a partisan event. That’s the risk of impeachment of an impeachment inquiry is that it just does that that Trump people do what they always do which is they turn everything into a circus sense into the chaos and make it seem more partisan than it is. Look I’m not saying Democrats aren’t acting out of partisan interests but I do think that there is a sincere concern about this and that I really do believe any person who’s just being objective and stepping back and looking at this and being honest and checking their you know Republican credentials at the door you know this is something that has to be dealt with this is something has to be addressed this cannot be something that is normalized and that we now say presidents can do these kinds of things John.


S4: I’m going to give you the last question on this which is do you think there is any way this investigation this impeachment inquiry can be carried out that will be not entirely partisan.


S15: Not unless and based on based on the the the early questioning of DNI Maguire it looks like it’s everybody’s playing to type and and so the answer your question is no it’ll be it’ll be totally partisan. I do. I do think again we just everybody has to wait for whether there will be any charismatic dissenters. You know the role that Margaret Chase Smith played or that Barry Goldwater played or that Hugh Scott played during the Watergate era where you had Republican senators again as you pointed out before. Not only is there a is there a media arm that didn’t exist with Nixon but you also have the parties have gotten a lot more polarized and a lot more conservative than they used to be. And so structurally you don’t even have really moderate Republicans in any kind of possible way. And you also don’t have to kind of break from the mold conservatives that way you had with Goldwater some people say that’s a good thing. With respect to the Civil Rights Act but also with respect to Nixon it’s a it’s helped push the impeachment thing along. So I think the only way that it wouldn’t go to its normal partisan sorting is if you have some Republican who is not you know of some stature say this is real this is serious.


S16: And and we’ll have to see if that happens in 2017 Jodi Kantor and Meghan to give the New York Times broke one of the most important stories of our time. Their investigation into Harvey Weinstein sexual misbehavior assault harassment intimidation toppled Weinstein and then opened the floodgates to charges of sexual misbehavior across many industries leveled at many men leading to the ME2 movement and the fall of men like Louis C.K. and Matt Lauer. Now Kanter and we have written she said an account of Weinstein’s misdeeds but also in fact much more so on account of how they got the story of those misdeeds by relentlessly finding women to talk and money to follow. And now we are joined in Brooklyn by Jodi Kantor investigative reporter at The Times. And I’m very proud to say former Slate colleague Hello Jody and congratulations. Thank you so much. So there’s so much to talk about in this book which is a great book and people should totally get read get out and buy it and read it. But one of the things that’s most shocking to me and she said it’s not necessarily the grotesque ness of Weinstein which we all now know about and processed but the incredible number of kind of collaborators he had in every place in every way. Why now as you look back over it why were there so many lawyers and partners and employees and other people so happy to be his collaborators and do you think that’s something that will change in the future while other powerful people have that same level of protection that he’s had.


S17: So before we answer I just want to say how thrilled I am to be here because in particular of the Slate connection what I what I have to disclose to gab fest writers is that about 20 years ago I was not a distinguished investigative journalist. I was a very unhappy law school student and I wanted to see if I could get into journalism but I didn’t know if I could do it it seemed very narcissistic to think that I could be the one writing or editing the stories. But I had a friend Frank for who put me in touch with you David and I wrote you kind of this I wrote you and your wife Hannah had this sort of beseeching email from my from my little apartment in Cambridge. And lo and behold you took a chance on me and I became a Slate editorial assistant which is what led me to becoming a reporter at The Times. And so I just feel very indebted to you permanently and very excited to be here.


S16: All right. All right. I’m going to say thank you to that and then I’m actually just going to go back at you for one second. Well I thought the mutual love fest here which is that Jodi had a remarkable quality in those of you who are young journalists or young anything which is a Jodi was and you can see this in her work today. She would come to me with 10 ideas and 10 of them would be bad and I would just send tell her there were 10 ideas and then like two hours later she’d be back with 12 ideas and 11 of them would be bad and then she’d go do the one that wasn’t bad and it would be amazing. And she was a kind of relentlessness and get back up at it. That is incredible that you see in this book anyway. Now you can answer the question.


S17: So to answer your question I think the hardest part of the big question who protected the women and who protected Harvey Weinstein and that’s part of why we wanted to write the book there were really two reasons One is to take you behind the scenes of these events that on the one hand had come to mean so much to so many people. But on the other hand we knew that the true story of what happened was still in many ways secret. And so that’s why we spent a year getting all of this off the record information onto the record and and reconstructing the whole thing so that we could really bring you there with us. But the second reason is the reason you name because there were these in the moral disaster that is the Weinstein story there were so many lessons left for the rest of us. You know when you ask your question the figure who really comes to mind is Bob Weinstein who is Harvey Weinstein’s brother. And not just his brother but a co-founder of his companies and kind of his lifelong business partner Bob Weinstein participated very significantly in the book he gave Meg and my partner a bunch of interviews and. And the question that sort of hovered over those interviews was was why why didn’t you do more. And he had a variety of explanations including the fact that he had this history that he had never discussed publicly of substance abuse and he talked about the fact that he saw his brother’s behavior through the the realm of addiction. Bob Weinstein in in kicking his own alcoholism had become kind of committed to this 12 step view of the world in which you say I can’t change anybody else’s behavior I can only change my own which he used. I think as a as sort of disastrous excuse to ignore his brother’s own behavior. But the reason why Bob Weinstein is so interesting is because of that question it poses to the rest of us what do we do in the workplace when we see wrongdoing. What if we don’t actually see it. What if it’s more like a rumor. What kind of choices are we going to make and who are we going to try to help.


S10: That’s a great segway into what I want to ask you about which is we’ve had this big movement and you and Megan are national treasures and all the work that you have done and there’s been so many changes in a very short period of time. What I do wonder about is has it changed enough where people feel comfortable doing exactly what you just said. If you are a person who brings up this kind of information within a company or you go public or you’re a woman who you know wants to accuse someone of sexual harassment do you think things have changed enough or people feel safe to do that.


S17: The confounding thing is that in the last two years everything has changed and nothing has changed. On the one hand you can argue that social attitudes are really different. There was this unprecedented series of firings we all lived through. Men whose careers really just evaporated all night once that overnight. Once this behavior was exposed I think there has been a very private reckoning among a lot of people with past behavior. On the other hand if you look at our fundamental laws and our systems and the way things work very little has changed. Sexual harassment laws in this country are so weak the federal sexual harassment laws they don’t protect you if you’re a freelancer they don’t protect you if you work for a business with under 15 employees. Just to give you a few examples. The biggest thing that has not changed is the secret settlement system. What we started to uncover during the original reporting but we uncovered a lot more of during the writing of this book is essentially the fact that the United States has kind of a secret system for silencing sexual harassment and abuse claims. If a woman goes to a lawyer and says something horrible happened to me I need your help. What that lawyer is likely to say is your best option is a confidential settlement and you’re going to get some money and you’re going to get to keep your privacy but you’re going to have to sign paperwork saying that you’re never going to tell anybody else about what happened and that’s what’s happened over and over again not just in the Weinstein case but we see settlements as an element in almost all of the big me two stories. And so what I think we’ve were just beginning to realize is that these settlements have not even come close to solving the problem and they’ve also enabled alleged predators to just silence the whole thing and go on to the next victim.


S10: But again just grow quick follow up on that though because I’ve been torn on this because at the same time if you’re a woman who lodges a sexual harassment complaint you only want that story told if you tell it on your own terms right because you don’t what you don’t want is the company to go around bad mouthing you and telling other people watch out for her. She sued us and she’s going to sue you. So is there is there a way to do N.D. where the company is actually not allowed to talk about it and the woman if she wanted to speak about it would would be able to speak about it.


S17: That’s exactly what some lawyers say that essentially what’s needed here is privacy not secrecy and there is a distinction and that the confidentiality should be at the discretion of the alleged victim that we’ve met a lot of women who sign these papers you know 20 years ago thinking it was the best thing at the time and 20 years later they’re like wait a second I don’t have the right to talk about my own experiences.


S15: Jodi I wondered if you have come up with a kind of scale of awfulness on which you plot behavior and I don’t mean necessarily the perpetrators in fact.


S14: In fact I mean of the enablers because it seems on the one hand you have the enablers who hire the lawyers or are the lawyers to discredit those who come forward who promote the system of secret settlements and that so there’s there’s kind of that’s at one end and then there’s the other thing which which you started by talking about and I was struck by a quote from Mitt Romney. And Romney was asked why no other Republicans were speaking out about the president’s call with the Ukrainian president. And Romney said I think it’s very natural for people to look at circumstances and see them in the light of them. What’s most amenable to their maintaining power and doing things to preserve that power. And that seems to me to be part of the enabling culture which is you know I don’t know there are these rumors. I don’t want to fuss with that. I just want to maintain my association with this powerful person or my position in this company. And that seems to be not on the same part of the scale as the actively awful but nevertheless a contributory factor. And I just wonder how you’ve sorted all that.


S17: So let’s talk about two figures. Let’s talk about Lisa Bloom and David Boies both very very prominent lawyers totally figures Lisa Bloom cuts this figure if like this feminist super lawyer she is Gloria all Red’s daughter. She very loudly proclaims herself to be a fighter for women. And what we discovered in our reporting we’ve known since the first summer of the investigation that Bloom crossed the line to the other side and went to work for Weinstein. What we publish in this book however is this extensive memo that’s essentially Bloom’s job audition memo for Weinstein and it’s chilling because she’s explicitly saying I will smear on your behalf. I will manipulate on your behalf to counter the allegation of Rose McGowan and other Weinstein abusers. So that’s the case of. That’s pretty. I mean I think on your scale of your sort of scale of the moral spectrum of complicity I think that’s pretty far to one end because she’s saying I’m going to use my credibility as someone who represents women to instead help Harvey Weinstein. David Boies one of the most famed litigators in the United States helped get gay marriage passed litigated Bush v. Gore. What’s interesting I think about Boies this work for Weinstein is the duration of it. Lisa Bloom was involved for a relatively small period Boies was Weinstein’s lawyer for 15 years and over that time he helped a race and pushed to the side and minimize and spin and bury a variety of allegations. And if you look at that time span that 15 year time span there are a lot of women who have made complaints during that time. So I think that’s also sort of a serious moral and ethical situation that also raises questions about the limits of legal practice. I mean how far is a lawyer supposed to go on behalf of his client. Now what Lisa Bloom and David Boies have in common though which goes to your second point is that they both wanted to be in the movie business with Weinstein. Lisa Bloom got very excited in the spring of 2017 because Weinstein Weinstein and J.C. optioned who by the way I don’t think I don’t know that J.C. has ever spoken about what’s happened. Basically her book which was called Suspicion Nation was optioned by Weinstein and Jaycee and she was very excited about that. David Boies wanted to be in the movie business as well. And in the book we actually have emails involving Weinstein helping to get roles for his daughter. So. So there you see. I think just like the attraction and the law of the movie business and the role it apparently played in the decisions these people made.


S6: Jodie this is kind of weird question but it really occurred to me as I was thinking about one thing. Do you think this story would have had the same impact if Weinstein wasn’t such a physically repellent person. Was that important the idea of this kind of grotesque looking monster assaulting young beauties and that helped make it grab the attention of people.


S17: Well I think where you’re really on to something is that one of our editors Matt Purdy has made the point that this was the first big story of this kind where the accusers actually had more public stature and credibility than the accused. If you think of the history of these stories going back to you know Clarence Thomas Anita Hill and Bill Clinton allegations it was often the case of this really powerful man being accused by a woman who is somehow of lesser stature you know either she just wasn’t as important in the culture or you know her her reputation could somehow be criticized or she was very young or whatever. And I think that there was a reversal in this story where and this was part of why we felt it was really important to get some of these famous actresses on the record. I worked with Ashley Judd Gwyneth Paltrow and Angelina Jolie to go on the record. And I think it became you know on the one hand I hate the idea that a famous woman’s word sort of counts for more than a regular woman’s. But it’s just undeniable that the stars had a kind of special power in this story not only are they very respected in society but people feel really familiar with them sort of like these celebrities belong to us. And so I I think it kind of goes along with what you’re saying in that there’s there’s sort of a respect and attachment in society to these female celebrities.


S9: Yeah. And I think there’s also been a lot of talk about if the you know if the accusations haven’t been coming from white women as well. Right. I mean if it had been coming from people of color would they would have had the same reaction in culture. The thing I was wondering is when you go into reporting on a story you always have sort of you know an idea of what you’re dealing with right. You wouldn’t be pursuing it if you didn’t. But I’m wondering as you got deeper into this what was the most surprising thing that you encountered or even shocking thing. You know did you have a moment where you thought like I didn’t really see that coming.


S17: Absolutely. The idea that nobody appeared to be immune. In June 2017 round like the second month of the investigation and Gwyneth Paltrow is barely on my list of people to call because I just think she was Weinstein’s biggest star. She was completely on a pedestal. You know her nickname was the first lady of Miramax and we all remember you know that beautiful picture of her winning the Best Actress Academy Award and she’s wearing that pink dress and she’s standing next to mine Stine. And then lo and behold I was sort of working a network of Hollywood women who were helping me. And one of them said Jenni Konner said to me Gwyneth is willing to talk to you. And I was so surprised. And then Gwyneth told me this story of sexual harassment. So basically let me lay out the situation. Gwyneth at that point is not a big star but Weinstein has offered her. Two roles one of which is really important. It’s the starring role in Emma. And it’s very clear that that’s going to be her big break before then she gets called to what appears to be a business meeting in an L.A. hotel with Weinstein. He according to her ends the meeting by placing his hands on her and saying let’s finish this in the bedroom. She is shocked and appalled. She lives doesn’t comply tells Brad Pitt who is her boyfriend at the time. Pitt then confronts Weinstein a few weeks later at an event. Weinstein gets incredibly angry that Gwyneth has told her boyfriend what happened. And Weinstein calls her and threatens her and basically says you’re you’re going to screw this up and you know essentially these jobs are on the line. If you tell anybody else he’s denied the story by the way. So that story gets us to the crux in some ways of the Weinstein allegations which are not just about the kind of physicality and the violence they’re about work and the fact that these women’s ambitions and dreams and aspirations around the line. And that he’s in some sense using those two he’s he’s almost like turning those against the women and then another thing that was surprising to us is that Gwyneth really wanted to help the investigation. So she started to ask us for all these tips on investigative journalism. And she set off trying to find other women in Hollywood who would speak to us. So we never would have predicted that that would’ve happened.


S18: Wow.


S12: Jody too from the journalists. And you know there was a long time these rumors were around. Q Tell us a little bit about kind of what allowed it to go forward. I mean obviously the Times was supporting you but. But what is also true and this would be true of of any news organization so I’m not saying this about the times but if this had been you know 1960 1972 maybe 1981 one would they have let a reporter go off and do the dogged and and time consuming work that you did.


S17: So our story really came about because of a bigger New York Times commitment to sexual harassment reporting are our sort of immediate predecessor was the O’Reilly story which I know now seems like it was a thousand sexual harassment stories ago but it was a real hit really really key one because Emily Steel and Mike Schmidt were able they essentially came up with a new technique for reporting on these kinds of claims which as it turns out that Bill O’Reilly had settled again sort of paid hush money to a bunch of women to silence their complaints about him over the years. So they were able to reveal that in the pages of The Times using the kind of legal and financial trail to talk about these accusations. And he was fired which was shocking at the time. It was just completely shocking. And that’s when the editors asked what now seems like a quaint question but was a very important one which is other other powerful men in American life who have abused women and covered it up. So basically what happened from there is that we were looking at all of these different industries. You know we were looking at academia and Silicon Valley and it was a big times team with you know reporters looking in every direction people were looking into the restaurant industry into factories. It was never really about one alleged predator it was always about a system. And also the fact that we were working together I think is definitely part of the answer to your question about what allowed us to finally prevail. You know we’re investigative journalists. So for us it’s not only about getting the on the record interviews. Obviously that’s a very important but we’re looking for documents we’re looking for. H.R. records we’re looking for internal company memos we’re looking for a legal and financial trail. And I think that that really helped finally break the story because it meant that there was less pressure on the women. In a way it wasn’t only about them coming forward. They had this kind of mountain of evidence to stand on.


S6: So Judy one of the things that that this book conveys and maybe maybe you won’t like this characterization was that you guys had a lot of fun doing this that it was there’s a lot of cloak and dagger. There’s this amazing moment when I won’t give too much away when a Weinstein executive does just you know it’s sort of just as as kind of movie as you can get a cinematic as you can get with his phone and you have Gwyneth Paltrow house that you’re at was it was it super stressful or was it incredibly fun.


S17: It’s such a good question because I think the sort of like elephant in the room in terms of what you’re asking is Jodie. This is a story about sexual assault and and and the ending of women’s careers. You know so can journalism about that be fun. I think the way I’d answer is to say that fun is is not exactly the word I would choose because the material is just sort of too painful. But I think that you’re exactly right in that there was something really galvanizing about it and empowering it was really I don’t want to speak on my sources behalf. What I hope they would say is that connecting these dots was empowering. It reached like beginning to see the pattern and beginning to understand there was always this like positive life force aspect to that. That I think countered some of the pain of what we were seeing.


S12: And Jody what when and how and how much did you think they’re coming after me. All these lawyers that you knew had had taken extraordinary efforts to try to discredit these women and protect Harvey Weinstein.


S17: Well look Megan and my attitude is that we live to do this. This is why we get up in the morning confronting the powerful is our job. We’ve got a lot of protection in doing it we’ve got the protection of the times. We’re much more worried about our sources. You know I’m going through the summer of 2017 just trying to do this reporting trying to be very careful obviously but not worrying too much about potential intimidation or whatnot. And it turns out that there are all these things happening that I would only learn about much much later. And some of this by the way is thanks to Ronan Farrow who did the black cube story and you know if you read that black cube story it’s in large part about us Black you took out a contract essentially on Meghan and my head saying I mean not to kill us God forbid a particular story and saying you know black who was going to get a bonus of hundreds of thousands of dollars if our story never appeared there was a black agent who tried to dupe me into giving her information. I had no idea who she was and I just ended up like brushing her away because she seemed like she seemed like a sort of like random. Person I didn’t have time to deal with. I was like Meghan and I have toddlers. So I don’t know if there are any parents listening to this. You know it’s that attitude of like I have to get my work done and then I have to get home to the kids. You know I don’t have time for like random coffees with people who want you know with like sort of vague you know I don’t want to sound rude but I just didn’t have time to meet with her anyway. The. And then the other thing that was surreal is that you know reporting for this book Meghan obtained Lisa Bloom’s billing records for Weinstein. So it’s like this hour by hour record of what she did for Weinstein because that’s what lawyers do they put together these these very itemized bills. And so there there are these items like research Jodi Kantor. Two hours at heat hundred and ninety five dollars an hour. So anyway I’m glad that I didn’t know about what was really happening in real time but I want this but also I want this I really want this to not be a story about intimidation. I want this to be a story about the journalists winning and the women winning because our experience in this specific example is that you can hire all of these fancy lawyers and you can pay all of this money and you can hire all of these you know sort of manipulative P.R. people. But if that cannot stand up to the facts and to dogged reporting and to these brave women’s voices.


S19: Jodi Kantor is the co-author with Meghan Tuohy of she said breaking the sexual harassment story that helped ignite a movement. It’s a great book. Jodi thanks for coming on. Jeff thank you so much.


S4: Let’s go to cocktail chatter when you’re having Harvey Wallbank. That is not probably a drink that people will still continue to order in the post wine scene era. I wonder what comes from God anyway when you’re having your non Harvey wall banger. What would you be chattering about.


S20: Kirsten Powers so I will be chattering about this article I read about a book that has come out called Dog is love. Why and how your dog loves you. Now Jon I know you have a dog that you love right. Yes indeed and no. No dog. No no dog. So you’re a sociopath basically right.


S21: Interestingly I’m not a sociopath. I’m a dog.


S20: Yes I’m highly suspicious of the people who don’t have dogs. Basically there’s always been this idea that dogs just love us because we feed them. Right. And what what this psychologist found when he did all these studies was in fact that’s not actually true. They actually really really love us and how in your ear I can see that you are not buying this. But they did studies where they you know so oxytocin levels spike when you’re with somebody that you love. Right. And so they studied that you know when they put the human and the dog together and then they started the levels and they not only rose in the human but they also rose in the dog. They also did MRI scans to check where the brain was lighting up and if they did a signal that suggested food was imminent or senior owner was imminent they actually the brain lit up more at the prospect of the human. Their human being nearby. So I feel like you’re very skeptical if like you’re looking at this very skeptical a hundred percent right. Yes. So you’re not buying this you think they just love us for the food I I’m sure.


S8: No I’m sure they love us for all sorts of reasons and I imagine they have love that it’s not food dependent. Well I must say I agree with you.


S20: So the other thing that they found was that there’s also been this assumption that dogs have been sort of very they call it successful which I think is kind of funny but they’ve been very successful as animals in the sense because they’re so intelligent. But then they went and they did studies on all sorts of other animals that are intelligent and found that you can train them to do things but you can’t they won’t ever love you. They won’t ever have that kind of interaction with you. So you know I just I’m obviously like a huge dog person and I just feel totally vindicated.


S4: I was just noticing this morning I’ve been away for a few days and my cats I’ve cats were very attentive to me and like coming in sort of pulling my face are very affectionate but also my children were also very attentive and affectionate.


S21: So they love you maybe they love they love John.


S19: What does your chatter.


S15: My chatter is from the Twitter feed of Lindsay Fitz who is has a great Twitter feed. She’s the author of a book called The butchering art which is about Victorian surgery. But she posted something a 19th century AD which we will which people can look at and should look at because of the way it’s laid out for Coco threats. Coco threats are a mixture of sugar. They are basically cigarettes made from tobacco and coca from the 19th century and it just given all of the conversation about vaping and and all of the flavors and the prom and the basically the attempt to get younger people to vape based on the pleasant taste. This made the promise that it would supply the place of food make the coward brave the silent eloquent and render the sufferer insensitive to pain and then it lists the ten reasons why it’s such a great idea to have some but it slightly undermines the case in this ad which lists the 10 reasons and then has this very odd looking kind of young woman smoking one. The first reason though undermines the case of how wonderful these are which is first they are not injurious and then it goes on anyway. So once you get over the first one though the cocoa is the finest nerve tonic and an accelerator ever discovered stimulates the brain to great activity. So check out the link and this ad and and let’s you could say this is actually a finding constantly finding fascinating fascinating stuff from the history of medicine. And just as this is some of it’s slightly grisly.


S4: What do you think that when when when our descendants look back on the advertising of this age what products do you think they’re gonna be like oh my god that’s hilarious.


S11: They believe that.


S7: I think both do you think most vitamins but vitamins aren’t super harmful but do you think botox isn’t super harmful also. That’s what it seems like right but then I always feel like it’s going to be like cigarettes where you look back and they’re like yeah they were in Jeff botulism into their heads. And you think that doesn’t really sound good.


S4: All right. We’ll find out. Check back in a century. My chatter is I have a secret. Incredibly boring vice which is that when I just this is just advice about how to fall asleep. So if you were like me somebody who’s having some sleep problems can I recommend. There is. There are now several documentaries one on Amazon and one on Netflix primarily about car racing culture. There’s a formula one documentary called drive to survive which is about Formula One racing and there’s a one on Amazon called lemons. Racing is everything which is about the 24 hour at Le Mans race. These are super high production documentaries about auto racing. It is so incredibly boring that it is the best way you’ll ever fall asleep. They’ve spent millions and millions upon millions and millions of dollars to produce these beautiful documentaries about auto racing which is the most boring reprehensible sport populated with people who are wasting their lives polluting the planet.


S8: All the fans are like it’s just rich people wasting a huge amount of money in places where you wouldn’t want to go because you could only get there on your yacht. And it’s it’s the culture is terrible. The drivers are terrible the way the money is being spent is terrible. The races look super boring and it’s. And yet these documentaries are are addictive and mesmerizing in their boredom. So good. Good. Good narcolepsy also listeners you have been sending us your chatter you’ve been tweeting chatter to us at Slate gabfest. So many good chatters John you want to listen carefully here. You’re gonna want to listen carefully to our listener chatter this week because fuzzy Marmont at real fuzzy Marmont.


S4: I also think has given us some chatter before points us to another story of a marine mammals encountering Russian military forces there’s a walrus or fact several walruses attacked and sank a Russian navy boat in the Arctic this week. It’s a wonderful story got to go check it out there’s some it wasn’t it wasn’t a big boat with a small boat who’s sort of more like one of those as inflatables that you date when you’re when you’re in your boat in harbor you’re anchored and you need to get into the beat yourself so that you can do whatever you’re gonna do on land you take one of these inflatable boats with ten people on it and it was. What’s their beef with the boats. Why not. Wouldn’t you. Would you be pissed off these dumb boats are coming and messing with you. And so the walruses were just like Hell no.


S11: And they they took this boat and there’s this and they they took it. Apparently they took the boat. They like it. They they seized the boat and then the Russians managed to get it back. But it’s a great story. So please keep sending us your chatters at at Slate gab fest please send them to us that way.


S3: That’s our show for today. The political gaffe as it’s produced by Joslyn Frank a researcher is Bridget Dunlap. We had engineering help from Melissa Kaplan here in D.C. married Jacob in New York and Rachel pier in also in New York with Jon at CBS. You should follow us on Twitter and at Slate get this tweet out your chatter to us there. For John Dickerson and Kirsten Powers. I’m David Plotz. Thank you for listening. We’ll talk to you next.


S16: Hello Slate Plus how are you so overshadowed unfortunately slightly overshadowed by the the the impeachment news of the week was the climate discussions here in the U.S. and particularly the presence of gratitude Berg the Swedish 16 year old climate activist who is that kind of incredible compelling presence.


S8: Did you see Kirsten the the that little clip of her in the background as Trump came in to talk and there was this. So there’s a pick there’s this Trump is coming and say whatever stupid remarks he’s going to say it at this clip. I think at the climate conference anyway she was in the back of the back and this camera person caught her and then moved to trump. And you just see this look on her face and the look it killed. Look literally could murder somebody her look of disgust and rage at watching Trump enter it was incredible. But she gave this this very very powerful extremely extremely powerful speech just attacking attacking us attacking everybody attacking all adults not just the ones who are say that climate change doesn’t exist but those who are say it exists but are unwilling to to make any hard choices. There’s the you know you’ve stolen my dreams and my childhood with your empty words were the beginning of a mass extinction. All you talk about is money and fairy tales of eternal economic growth how dare you. And she’s just her presence is gripping. But she also enrages people why does she enrage people.


S10: Well I think that people that seem enraged by it are people who don’t want to talk about this issue. Right they don’t want to hear about climate change. And so instead they they have to attack her base and she’s not just as you said she’s not just criticizing climate change I mean she’s she’s criticizing the whole system. She’s criticizing capitalism. She’s she’s pathetic honestly is the way I look at her. I mean I think she’s she’s speaking real truth and a lot of times people don’t like that when that happens and say you have a particularly conservatives attacking her and basically saying Oh she’s just a pawn and she’s just a prop and you know we shouldn’t listen to them. Rich Lowry wrote in his column kids have nothing to teach us. I just was like I ve been around a child I don’t even understand what you’re talking about. I learned so much from my nieces. I think children you know out of the mouths of babes you know it truly. Children have very important things to say to us and a lot of times it’s because they haven’t been jaded and they haven’t been weighted down with all of all of the baggage of life and they can see things in a much more innocent pure way. And so I think that she is also an incredible role model for for everybody. But in particular you know she has Asperger’s and you know so she is she’s such a great role model for people who have Asperger’s who have autism.


S8: And for I think for young people to speak up I have a son who’s just got to tune Burke’s age who has Asperger’s. And I was thinking about what is it that’s so distinctive about him and one of the thing. And why is it that she is able to say the things that she’s able to say and say it with such force and I realize that one of the the kind of features slash bug that people with Asperger’s generally is like general you know often an indifference to social norms convention and the social norms around what you say around climate around what you say to people are so strong and yet the crisis is so enormous and it’s it’s very hard for most of us to look at the enormity of that crisis in the face it’s too fucking scary to look at in the face and gratitude Berg made whether it’s because you just have a powerful moral sense or powerful policy sense or that Asperger’s kind of magnifies it has the ability to speak kind of honestly and directly and intensely that most people don’t have. Whether they’re kids adults anybody.


S10: But I think that Asperger’s is part of what what has given her that was feel it and she had tweeted that you know that being different. Her superpower right.


S4: I really I really think that’s true. John did you watch her at all.


S15: I did. I did I. I tend to find that the dislike of her kind of obvious. I mean these people who you know who don’t either don’t believe in significant man made contribution to climate change or don’t believe in the most of the solutions but who usually who often don’t like the people who are making the case for it. And in this case I guess the the idea is that there is a kind of emotional leverage that a child has that that that supporters of hers are using against them and that it’s kind of a it’s kind of dirty trick dirty pool to use her to advance a political argument is I guess one of the ways that I was reading the opposition to her.


S8: I think that’s so weak. I actually thought the most interesting discussion of her was from Macedo and they were in the New Republic seat of the former colleague of ours at Slate that actually what’s happening towards what he describes as Santa Claus defecation which is that she’s been made into this this happy this interesting mascot.


S4: People are meaning her having fun with her and they’re not actually taking her seriously that the ideas she’s proposing are incredibly threatening and they’re threatening not just to people who don’t believe in manmade climate change but people who do believe in it but just aren’t comfortable and don’t want to have lower economic growth and don’t want to constrain their flying and don’t want to drive less and instead that people have adopted her in this kind of mascot way and are enjoying that enjoying using her as a mascot against the right and against that. You know the Trump ish work part of the world but they aren’t willing to actually engage with her very threatening ideas.


S9: Well I think they’re doing that at their own peril because I think she’s representative of probably what we’re going to be seeing more and more of even if you just look at millennials or Generation see their values are very different. There they are they are questioning this idea of worshipping at the altar of economic growth. They are more predisposed to socialism.


S10: They are they are they are looking at the older generations and saying thanks you know for what you’ve done to us. And so I think that I think this is going to continue and I think she’s just one particularly articulate person and the right on this. I think there’s nothing you can do to ever be a valid spokesperson they will always find a reason to say you’re a hypocrite. So for example she sailed instead of taking a jet. And so she’s getting attacked for that publicity stunt you said you know you sailed instead of taking a jet but is she taking a jet right the way to talk of her taking a jet there’s nothing you can ever do actually to be an acceptable spokesperson on this issue because they don’t want to hear about it right.


S19: All right Slate Plus calculator. Bye bye.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for October 24th 2019.


S3: Cooper Taylor skipper spy edition. I’m David Plotz about the Obscura. I’m in Washington D.C. Joining me from New Haven Connecticut. From New York Times Magazine and Yale University Law School. It is Emily Bazelon. Hello Emily.


S4: Hi. You sound like an announcer for the next Democratic debate. Are you practicing.


S5: They invite you in. Moderator they have not asked me to moderate. Maybe there are some moderate.


S6: And from CBS is 60 Minutes or he has now been inaugurated. He has said I’m John and I’m John Dickerson on 60 Minutes. It is in fact. John Dickerson Hello.


S7: John Dickerson Hello. DAVID Hello Emily.


S8: Hello. We very vague.


S1: Simon for your debut Can I just say that yes we are excited we’re even going to hit it up hit back to it in Slate Plus.


S9: Oh yeah. That’s really good listener. Very good. Yes. We’ll keep the log rolling.


S10: We’ll reference it on today’s gabfest. The most shocking impeachment testimony yet impeachment takes some dark strange turns this week then Facebook is it evil or just terrible or merely wicked. We will discuss then should should Democrats should progressives take to the streets to try to end the Trump presidency what has happened to mass protest. Why is there not more mass protest during this presidency. Plus we’ll have cocktail chatter so much impeachment action this week.


S11: There were a bunch of critical elements on Tuesday and Wednesday and Thursday as we take note out more things are happening first. Probably most importantly Bill Taylor ambassador to Ukraine testified that there absolutely was a quid pro quo planned within the U.S. government apparently the President Trump’s orders to withhold 391 million dollars in military aid to the government of Ukraine until the Ukrainian president publicly announced a probe into the pipe. Biden’s second there was a scheme that was again seems to have come out of Taylor’s testimony in other places which was delineated which involved getting the Ukrainian prime minister to act out his announcement of a probe on CNN they attempted to sort of extort him to go on CNN and gave him a script of what he would need to say to announce this probe. Third the Ukrainians did indeed know about this quid pro quo demand. One of the claims that the Trump administration has made is that they could have been a quid pro quo the Ukrainians didn’t even were even aware of it false they did know about it a month earlier than previously believed contradicting the administration’s claim and and then finally well maybe not finally a group of conservative legislators invaded the skiff the secure room where secret depositions were taken. Actually I guess they weren’t taken in that room but they invaded the secure room to protest the secrecy of the impeachment inquiry and delay the impeachment inquiry for five hours. I’m sure there are other crucial points that I have missed.


S5: They ordered pizza and brought their cell phones into this and they brought their cell phones stick into the skiffs. Yes I would like to talk less about this gift because I feel the need to direction.


S6: So Emily what was so important and what Bill Taylor the ambassador to Ukraine said and why is he an important witness.


S8: I think until now the clarity there was clarity lacking in the accusation that President Trump withheld military aid to Ukraine which Congress had approved in exchange for the Ukrainians promising or at least beginning an investigation to dig up dirt on Joe Biden and his son and also into the origins of the 2016 election.


S4: Kind of following along a conspiracy theory that Trump believes in. That would discredit the Mueller investigation and the whole notion that the Russians helped Trump win the 2016 election. So what we have now from Taylor is this explicit quid pro quo for something big military aid as opposed to something smaller which was the withholding of a meeting between Ukrainian presidents Lansky and Trump. So this is the quid pro quo. Trump has denied that all his defenders in the Republican Party have relied on and Taylor has a ton of credibility. He has 50 years in public service. He has served every presidential administration Republican and Democratic since 1985. And he brought receipts. He had this 15 pages of testimony based on notes that he had taken while these events are unfolding. And he spoke so much in sorrow rather than anger expressing deep dismay about the kind of ruining of America’s strong support for Ukraine in the face of Russian aggression. And it seemed clear that he was motivated by this feeling that the government has taken a disastrously wrong turn and that is harming a country and a part of the world that he has poured himself into and cares a great deal about. Well so I mean it was a pretty blockbuster day honestly.


S12: Well I want to interrupt on one important point which is that all of what you’re saying may well be true. I’m sure it is true. But how do we know that you are characterizing something that was done in secret and has been leaked out so say.


S8: Well we do have these 15 pages of testimony from Taylor and I you know I think to me I find this whole notion that the Democrats are doing some dastardly deed by holding these closed door hearings. I don’t buy that. You know lots of preliminary aspects of congressional investigations take place behind closed doors. See Benghazi run by the Republicans eventually these folks are going to have to testify in public if we proceed to an impeachment trial in the Senate or they’ll testify in public in the house before then. This seems like a perfectly fine way to gather information. I kind of wonder if the Democrats are making a political error because these witnesses seem to be very strong on the other hand I’m so glad we’re not having to listen to these members of the House grandstand on television why they ask their questions. So whatever I do however want to hear more backup testimony for Taylor’s account because he talked about a number of other officials who were in the room or on important phone calls and what he was just bribing. And then there is a contradiction between key aspects of his testimony and things that Gordon Sunland who’s the kind of trump guy in the middle of this has told Congress and also Kurt Volker. There are the like Trump officials whose accounts now sound fishy.


S13: So John one of the few gaps in the Taylor testimony at least as it’s been reported out is that he did not have any direct order from the president to quid pro quo something that he was hearing that second hand that people said oh the president had said this and directed chief of staff Mulvaney to do this and that. Does that matter.


S14: No.


S9: I mean a couple of things is the president does not need to just in the same way in a in a crime so he does need to say exactly what they’re doing when they’re doing it. And also this isn’t a crime and the car and the venue in which it’s being adjudicated is not strictly a legal one. It’s kind of it’s a quasi legal political and and legal it gets to a legal stage when you get into the Senate and you and you do in fact have the chief justice presiding. So it’s it’s not totally completely political but if you keep the eye on the ball which is that the president is is accused of misusing his job and the powers of his job for his own political purposes and then bending U.S. foreign policy for his own political purposes in a way that we know one of the things that Taylor also reportedly testified about based on the 15 pages of opening statement is that that the Ukrainians were dying at the hands of the Russian led forces as a result of the delay in American military aid. So the consequences here are real. They are directly real. And with respect to the delays that were for the purposes as he did he apparently testified for the purposes of getting promises about this investigation and I should note quickly that it’s the public promise of the investigation is politically powerful more than simply the private promise to investigate because of course as we know from other investigations once you say an investigation is happening off you know it takes all these legs and it becomes and and as we saw from the coverage of the State Department investigation of Hillary Clinton’s emails. The investigation itself gets a lot more coverage than the exoneration does anyway. So you have the president who is bending U.S. foreign policy for his own private political purposes and so that’s the big problem. And there it’s not just Taylor what makes Taylor damaging is that Taylor has testified to something that now a whole host of other people from the from Voltaire to Sunland to hill all testified to parts of this. There is a quote and then this was all in furtherance of of ratifying what the original whistleblower said and it’s essentially what Mick Mulvaney said out loud from the White House podium which he then had to had to backtrack or he had. And so the story lines up what Taylor says brings into sharper relief a story that was already coming together. And finally I would just say I think you were being you were having fun with that question and the idea that this is all being happening in secret. Emily’s answer is the right one of course. This process will play out and it will not be secret and people will have to put the facts on the table. But one thing we do know is we have a pattern of behavior of President Trump’s much of that pattern is what got him elected. And the idea that he would not be involved and not interested in a possible political benefit to his campaign from looking at corruption in Ukraine and then this was solely about his dedication to the idea of corruption is inconsistent with the picture of Donald Trump that the people have had a chance to publicly witness over the last three years.


S11: And just to actually add pungent detail to that. So one of the claims that the specious claims that the administration seems to be making it oh this is simply the primarily the president being concerned with corruption Ukraine. But if you look at the actual behavior of the administration as was reported I think in the Times The Washington Post had an article in The Post about the cutting of the funding gap.


S6: Yes that that the administration has consistently thought to pursue cuts to all all the programs which root out corruption in Ukraine and other places. And the idea that this is actually a matter of concern that corruption is actually a matter of concern of this administration is clearly nonsense based on the facts. Emily. So what John has just presented and what we’ve all seen this week is this this incredibly damning set of of supposed of alleged facts and reporting about the president’s withholding of congressionally appropriated military aid to our allies who were causing the probable deaths and weakness of an ally of ours for personal political gain and distorting of American foreign policy possibly suborning suborning the Ukrainian president to appear on media to lie about it which actually may in fact be a crime according to something I read. And yet and yet and yet and yet there is not a significant amount of outrage on the right about this.


S8: Any chance that that starts to change if it happens it’s going to happen all at once because the only way to do it safely is to do it in a park. And I think that Fox News would also have to basically simultaneously turn on Trump. I think it’s possible but unlikely that we’re going to see that switch because I think there is such fear of the Republican base in terms of its loyalty to President Trump personally. When you look at how polarized Congress is and then the changing way in which people consume news and how it’s delivered from Watergate I think you see just like a different set of conditions on the ground for the political assessment that you’re talking about. John what do you think.


S9: One thing that occurs to me just that I want to finish off on my point about the publicly observable behavior of the president. What we have in this instance that’s alleged and that and that actually the president has said out loud is that he cared so much about corruption that he delayed furthering U.S. foreign policy which was to help Ukraine to keep pressure against the Russians. So in this case corruption was so important that U.S. foreign policy was in a secondary position with respect to Turkey Russia Philippines Saudi Arabia and probably some countries I’m not remembering the president to the acclaim of many has taken an extremely relaxed position towards corruption murder all kinds of bad behavior human rights abuses in order to support countries that he argues are doing things in the favor of American foreign policy. So just in terms of of taking the alleged acts and measuring them against what a what Donald Trump normally does we have yet another instance in which this behavior is so completely out of character from a character we know one thing about who doesn’t change the way he behaves he may change his positions but doesn’t change this wildly. So this is this is why you don’t necessarily need to have the transcript in front of you. The facts that are known suggests that the story you’re getting is asks you to believe something that your your own experience wouldn’t you wouldn’t suggest is the case in politics. The most important thing I think that happened this week and it may not have even it may have been a slip of the tongue in which case I’m putting too much weight on it.


S15: But Mitch McConnell was asked if he as the president had claimed told the president that his phone call with the president of Ukraine was perfect. McConnell said. He asked this in front of a group of reporters. McConnell said he never talked to the president about the phone call for the president of Ukraine and when then when Nancy Cordes of CBS who asked the original question and said Well then why is he lying. McConnell said Well you’ll have to ask him. Mitch McConnell and perhaps above all others and I think he take this as a compliment knows how not to answer a question. We all know and it become conditioned to what it sounds like when a politician gives a response and not an answer. When he was asked did he have this conversation with the president did he say it was a perfect phone call he could have said given a principal dancer I never talk about what I talk about with the president. He could restated the point said that was a perfect phone call and not address the idea of whether they’d ever talked about it. He could answer to a totally different question. He could have blamed the Democrats. He could have talked about the the devil and the deep blue sea. He didn’t do any of that. He said the phone call never took place. Maybe it was a rare slip up from one of the most calculating politicians on the Hill. It could also be a sign that that Mitch McConnell is sending signals to the president look you better clean this up better than you have so far. Or McConnell feels if you look at somebody like Cory Gardner running for re-election as a Republican in Colorado his numbers are very bad at the moment for re-election. McConnell would have to lose a lot of seats in this off year election. But if the president goes down in flames that’s not going to be good for senators running and Mitch McConnell’s majority ship of the Senate could be in peril. So that’s a lot of extrapolation from one answer but I think it’s an interesting thing to watch.


S10: But look we haven’t and I’m just I’m not getting indignant at you because you’re you’re merely a Tribune you’re merely carrying a message forward in the world. It is absolutely outrageous. This is the subordination of American foreign policy something which Republicans Democrats a bipartisan bill to help Ukrainians military aid to. To help the Ukrainians in a war against Russia. And the president has has taken this and put it to his own completely nefarious political purposes. It’s you know revolting. It is an undermining of Congress. It is an undermining of foreign policy. Where is the where’s just the kind of civic outrage that should exist in our legislators. It’s shocking it’s shocking that not even one of them not even Mitt Romney who I admire the heck out of it is able to to speak up about this.


S8: Well four way Romney spoken up a little bit. He just hasn’t said like I’m ready to impeach.


S5: I mean of the Republic Romney is doing the battle remotely followed by far by far.


S10: But I’m saying. Even the person who has not much to lose is not really kind of standing up and saying firmly how absolutely outrageous this is.


S7: Can I Can I just throw some some kindling on your on your roaring fire. In fact what you have is at least you have a couple of instances of the exact opposite happening so you have Steve Scalise in the leadership the whip of the Republicans in the house in this stunt that we mentioned at the top of the conversation saying that Republicans are being shut out of this secret process. Forty five Republicans have access to the to the transcripts of the interviews in which Republicans are taking place. And what that does I think is different than what what happens when when members of Congress are asked to stand up for something the president says and they they shuffle away and say I didn’t hear what he said or they mischaracterized what he said. So as not to have to defend it or so forth and so on. Those are you know low grade things what Congressman Scalise is doing and others have done it as well is basically taking he knows what the rules of the of the of the House procedures are in power in part because they were passed by a Republican majority. He knows how this works. He knows that Republicans are in there in the meetings that they stormed. Nevertheless he’s presenting it to the public as if as if Republicans were not allowed as if the Democrats are doing something terribly wrong. This is to to basically distort reality by burning the institution that he is a part of. And that he has some obligation of stewardship stewardship towards and that is something that you can’t go back against. That’s something you can’t you know say well it was Donald Trump and he has an interesting way of talking. This is using something that’s happening in the moment. And and it’s also causing other kinds of weird back bends. Senator John Cornyn saying you know this impeachment is overturning an election by definition impeachments overturn elections. That’s what they do. So yes. And there is only one actually there’s only one person president who could have been impeached where it would not overturn an election and who would that be Gerald Ford.


S16: Ding ding ding ding ding ding Very good David very god very good. I was I went I thought it included I include I included Chester Arthur and John Tyler but Martin to me in pointed out.


S7: No actually since they were vice presidents they would have been elected as well and so would be John. Actually yes. Right now. Well that these. Well and Truman and so forth. But they were ultimately elected. If you are one president it would be for it.


S12: So anyway Carry on everybody. To add on to what Jonathan around Scalia’s son and they’re burning down their own institution. This is why I think there’s so much outrage about the skiff takeover not over the protest which seems legit. But if the members of Congress bringing their cell phones into the secure facility which is totally trivial question in some ways trivial matter but it does show the way in which they’re they are willing to ignore rules ignore principles ignore things which they they have held to be important to other circumstances just to completely grandstand a point into that small act of destruction of destruction of the security of that facility is in some ways more significant than all the disruption that they’re causing from their protest.


S8: Well they did it to distract right I mean they succeeded in changing the headlines for at least a day. So like good on them for that as a political move. But I think the part of the reason maybe you’re thinking about this or at least I was last night is all the things that were like down and up and up is down. So you know we used to basically as a country agree that like ISIS was bad that preventing Russian aggression was a goal of the United States. And lately that protecting classified information if it had anything to do with you know Hillary Clinton or her state department was incredibly vital. And now all of those things are like up for grabs in the Republican Party.


S11: And another one of those is that the State Department that American diplomats represent our interests. And then you have this complete gutting of the State Department undermining of the idea of these diplomats working for the national interests and it’s now it’s all deep state conspiracy and instead we have we have the cartoonishly sinister trio of Giuliani and his henchmen going over to to run shadow foreign policy which is supposedly better than what all these diplomats are doing.


S15: Can I jump on that point very quickly which is that Bill Taylor was appointed by Trump George W. Bush and originally put in the foreign service by Ronald Reagan but that actually none of that should matter. A secretary of state should stand up for those officials because it sends a signal to the rest of his team to the rest of his State Department and that’s one of the things that Taylor was getting at in his opening statement which is that the norms and traditions and honor and character and duty that you feel to this shared set of beliefs that is what propels people into 30 year careers in the foreign service that is what propels people to join the CIA. And do you know dangerous or unsung work late at night. That is what as secretary of defense Mattis explained to me that is what sends the young man or woman up the hill in Afghanistan that these ideas and these this sense of duty and this that that Taylor was writing about in his opening statement. That’s what is at stake here.


S8: There was another aspect of that opening statement. I’ve been thinking about which is that Taylor describes his concern when the secretary of state Pompeo asked him to take over as the top diplomat in Ukraine. And the reason Taylor was concerned is that he knew that Marie Jovanovic had been pushed out in this unruly way by Giuliani and his henchmen. So he’s saying to Pompeii like basically I only want to do this job if it’s clear that the United States support for Ukraine and true anti-corruption efforts in Ukraine and strengthening Ukraine against Russia if all those values are still our policy and what we hold dear. And Pompeo reassured him. And obviously you know Taylor feels completely sold out. But I also wonder if Pompeo is really regretting that he appointed someone to this job it was an actual upstanding public servant. Right. There are like these key sort of mid-level positions in the impeachment story that if they were held by flunkies this whole story would be different. Taylor is one of them. The inspector general for the intelligence community whose name is Michael Atkinson. He’s the one who made sure the whistle complaint whistleblower complaint actually made it to Congress. I mean it had its own route to Congress but he went basically around the Justice Department which was saying oh no you don’t have to turn this over if these people were all like political toadies we would not have the record that we have.


S12: We have our annual conundrum show coming up live at the Fox Theater in Oakland California on December 18th we have tickets still at Slate dot com slash live. We want you to come and we also want you to send us your conundrums. We have some good ones but you should tweet to us with hashtag conundrum or go to our special forums like dot com slash conundrum and fill it out with a conundrum there we’ve gotten some great ones from you already. So for example is this a real this is a philosophical question is hell the devil’s heaven. I don’t know that’s deep.


S8: That’s a question for the good days. Got a lot to a lot of that show to be able to answer for the rest of your life.


S10: You either have to speak in rhyme or sing everything you say which shoot to man.


S6: There’s so many more other good ones. Please come to our show in Oakland on December 18th Slate dot com slash live.


S12: For tickets Emily Bazelon what is going on at Facebook and with Facebook. Relationship with politics and with Congress and with conservatives and with politicians there seems to be a bunch of different streams all merging and a whole again as usual makes Facebook seem deeply unappealing.


S8: Yeah. So Facebook and its CEO Mark Zuckerberg are emerging as a kind of villain and punching bag for both the right and the left and a difficult position. But of course whose fault is that. So what we’ve seen in the last week is the real debate to use a polite word over Facebook s current policies involving ads political ads for the upcoming elections and also just like speech in general. And so Zuckerberg tried to address this head on with the big speech at Georgetown University in which he comes out strongly for the values of free speech and he says look people don’t want their ability to see different points of view mediated by any kind of company and so we’re putting all these political ads out there for you to judge for themselves. And if politicians are lying well you can hold them accountable. This is of course not a new position. This is the idea that Facebook is a platform not a publisher and is thus not responsible for a lot of the content that it puts out there in the world.


S4: The problem with this of course is that on a number of fronts Facebook is very much policing content and it is actually deviating from its current fact checking policies for political ads treating them differently than it treats other content. And I think Congresswoman Alexandra Del Castillo Cortez did like an amazing job of kind of showing Zuckerberg at his most evasive and and just sort of unsatisfying in terms of the policies he has about political ads on the right. You also have Facebook very aware that Senators like Josh Holley off Missouri are making their bones by accusing Facebook of being biased against conservatives. And I also think that Facebook is kind of stuck with Zucker Berg’s own libertarian ideology. He really does want to believe that his company is making the world better and that its policies toward campaign speech in general and ads in particular is going to work. I think it’s not going to work. I think that Facebook is going to be a force for ill not good in the upcoming elections but Zuckerberg just doesn’t want to see that. And there is a pretty easy fix here which is that Facebook could just say you know what. We’re not going to run any political ads if they don’t want to do that writ large. They could say that about national elections you know for local candidates or smaller races you can see the value in people being able to promote their views on social media and maybe they’ll be more likely to be held accountable for lying which used to be something people didn’t do in ads because it was shaming but for the national elections in particular the presidential election it’s really hard to see how Facebook running ads is a good thing.


S15: But here’s the question that if people have stopped Penn penalizing candidates for lying.


S16: Haven’t we gotten to a place where Facebook and not new. Neither Facebook nor anyone else can solve that problem. Facebook can’t plug every hole in the in the dam which again isn’t an argument for not trying to do anything. But then the question is are the real serious problems of our of our information sharing much deeper and more problematic than anything that he can fix.


S13: So what I think is being overlooked in this I actually think the political ad issue is pretty minor. It’s not nothing and and there’s a Decepticon quality a huge amount of the political advertising on Facebook and you also can’t track it the way you could track TV ads and so that’s it.


S8: So people know responses to political ads then change their algorithm in terms of other things that are presented.


S10: I don’t think it’s a I just don’t think it’s a huge issue. What I think is being overlooked here is the way or underplayed are all these attacks on Facebook from the right. This notion that Facebook is somehow biased against conservative when actually the exact opposite is what’s happened is that Facebook has now become and Facebook and the Facebook ecosystem have become so effective for organizing on the right and for passing on false mostly false largely false information if you look at the most shared articles on Facebook on any given day nine of 10 of them are conservative semi truth at best kinds of articles things from Ben Shapiro is always showing up on the top of those lists and that the that actually this idea that that Facebook is is somehow suppressing the speech on the right is just nonsense. What’s happening is that is because there’s a kind of I dunno if it’s a gullibility if there’s a willingness to believe it that Facebook is just a more effective ecosystem for four people on the right but it is where the ideas of the right and the more dangerous ideas the right find purchase but you know root in and get shared and I think what Mark Zuckerberg doesn’t really want to acknowledge Mark Zuckerberg who I think probably thinks of himself as a libertarian with a liberal bent is that he has created an environment is very very useful for the right and for people that he actually finds loathsome and he will gradually heat because he’s been doing these dinners with conservative pundits you know he’ll have Tucker Carlson and other folks of that vein over for dinner and have these discussions with them he’s going to end up in that world he’s going to you I guarantee you within three years we’ll see him at dinner with Jared Kushner and a banker Trump and they’ll be hanging out together is that he’s that the company is fundamentally an ecosystem for the right now not for the left.


S8: And that’s a great network problem. And then add to that that he gave a speech to his employees that leaked in which he talked about the idea of an anti-trust action against Facebook in potential Elizabeth Warren administration as an existential threat to the company. Now that’s a good natural stance for him to take like yes if the government brought in antitrust enforcement action against Facebook. That would be a problem so you can see why he doesn’t want that to happen. But I think again the politics are pushing him in a particular direction.


S16: David’s essentially saying a version of what I was saying because I think that if you look at the top 10 things and by the way if you’re not David you can tell me. But if you look at those top 10 stories those would seem to me to be beyond Facebook s reach those stories that are being sent around are not really a lot of them are not fact checkable. I mean they are characterizations and framing and elevations of certain issues that distort political reality perhaps but that don’t have a specific fact that can be that can be pinpointed and therefore to remove them. What strikes me about Facebook and I mean they did they did remove a recent network of Russian backed accounts that are another one of the challenges out there because the Russian backed accounts are not just fake they’re they’re actually using things that would be considered not fact checkable to create division and dissent and discord. And so that’s a problem which they are. Another problem they have to solve which they’ve done some things to try to get at. But what what strikes me is that lack of creativity towards improving these more basic ideas about critical thinking and and that if you were any of these companies Facebook or Twitter or any of the others that you’re there is an opportunity to use and come up with new ways that would actually promote or at least try. You may not solve it but at least try to break people out of these patterns that are causing these tribal reactions to information.


S4: You know one of the things that Facebook is just refusing to really face up to or at least I haven’t seen it publicly do that is the way in which its algorithms promote insightful content even if it’s not completely false like you’re saying social media insightful with a C insightful you mean insight.


S5: Yes. Yeah. Not now not. Yeah. Yeah. All right. I just want to clarify.


S8: Yes. Content that has the effect of inciting people and provoking strong emotions in particular anger. I mean we’ve seen this on YouTube and we see it on Facebook and Instagram and the other social media platforms it controls. And so that’s another way in which there is a bigger responsibility here. And you know you can also think about this in terms of the way in which the government is abdicating its role. So our government does not want to tell people what they can or can’t see on social media but our government does regulate the airwaves and television.


S4: And so in a way I think the most to me persuasive or at least like poignant thing that Zuckerberg can say is like look the government has put us in this awkward position of having to figure out how much to police speech. And we don’t want to be in that position. You can argue that what should be happening here is the FCC should be helping Facebook or taking over from Facebook in making some of these decisions.


S10: Yeah. I think that’s just not going to happen. Not offensive.


S8: Not yet. But it’s something another administration could really take on. I mean that. Right. Like we have to get away from the notion that the government can’t do anything about this because then you have the social media companies in that role. And that is not like the really great place to locate this discussion. Their incentives are not public service.


S16: Yeah. They’re admitting that basically that their model benefits from bilge would be a good first step. Yes. And it’s the same it’s the same natural reaction that. And you know the hunt for attention has been what all these social media platforms have been after since their inception. And politicians are looking for the same attention and they know how to keep it and maintain it which is by riling you up and fundraisers who send you the solicitation selling you the wolf is at the door. Do the same thing. The House and Senate which flips all the time between parties. There’s the structure of the thing creates no incentive for working together. The incentives are for demonizing the opponents so that you can gain control of the institution again. So they are flowing with and profiting from the attention shattering that’s been a part of all of these other parts.


S13: They should the way they advocated for a more inclusive immigration policy they should turn loose their energies and passions and powers towards creating this new what fantastic solution to grow in the other direction Slate Plus members you get bonus segments on this podcast and on other Slate podcast today in tribute to Jon’s wonderful interview his first 60 Minutes interview where he got Christine Legarde to show how she pretends to drink wine. We will talk about other ways to pretend to do things and you can see that if you go to Slate dot com slash gap has plus you can’t see it actually because we’re podcast but you could hear us talking about it if you get like that complex Gaddafi’s plots to become a member today but you could see John’s interview with Christine Legarde on 60 Minutes. All of a sudden this week there was a spate of pundits making the same argument. I think it began with Matt Yglesias inbox then infected David Lee and Hart and Michelle Cottle at the New York Times all arguing making the same point that perhaps the key way to accelerate the removal of predator President Trump or to accelerate his unpopularity is mass protests. And yet there are not mass protests so John why are there not mass protests right now. We began the Trump presidency with probably the largest protests in American history. There was also after the Stoneman Douglas shooting there was this marvel instead of protests around gun safety. But at the moment impeachment has not caused a up swelling of people in the streets in the way we see in Hong Kong and Chile and in other countries.


S15: There have been mass street protests that seem to be having causing real change or at least causing real uproar Well I think I mean one there is probably a certain sense of fatigue and proof of this is that some of the news organizations that used to catalog and every one of Donald Trump’s lies have stopped doing it.


S17: They’ve just been too many of them. And it’s also quite taxing because if you care about the opinion of other people you actually need to evaluate whether what’s being said is a lie or merely being spun. But the point is that even people who are in the business of paying close attention and despite fatigue are getting fatigued by the kind of constant pace of things in the modern world.


S16: I think secondly impeachment is probably more abstract than if it is specific right of yours that whether it’s the right to vote or or that even the migrants being separated at the border from their children or with women and an abortion rights there’s a direct personal relationship with either the specific issue where somebody you know who cares a great deal about the specific issue. But I don’t I. So I think that explains perhaps some of the middling turnout but. But I think as a as an organizational tool for people who are opposed to the current administration to use public demonstration not necessarily to improve the conditions of the impeachment inquiry but merely as a way to capture voters register voters and otherwise participate in the electoral process the way the same Tea Party did.


S17: Seems to me to be you know probably a smart way to go from a political perspective if you’re not a fan of the president.


S8: Yeah I mean I thought Matt Iglesias initial article was pretty persuasive. One of the things that is at stake here is just like getting media attention some sense of urgency that this is something that people are really galvanized by and horrified by. And it seems like impeachment right now could take on that character in a way that it didn’t have the same kind of momentum behind it last summer when organizers kind of tried to do some impeachment rallies. So it does seem like that kind of pressure point could be really meaningful right now and give people an outlet for their energy.


S12: Emily do you think the purpose of that is to actually build support for impeachment and removal from office. Or is the purpose more of a bank shot or more of an electoral play which is this may not cause the removal of President Trump from office an impeachment conviction but it will definitely galvanize these protests will serve this electoral organizing function the way that the women’s march in twenty seventeen hugely did which is that the women’s march was itself sort of a one day event but it ended up having this tremendous knock on effect because it cal it inspired a whole bunch of people who would then become candidates and inspired groups that then helped organize for the 2018 election. So do you think that the these protests are removal protests or they are fundamentally for electoral purposes for 2020.


S8: I mean I think it’s both the argument Matt was making is that Watergate was all about moving the kind of technical insider D.C. political mechanisms toward impeachment and what my point now was at the time the parties were much less polarized the judiciary wasn’t split between conservatives and liberals in the same way there was no Federalist Society. And you also had three nightly news networks delivering essentially the same set of facts into American households every night so an agreed upon set of facts for the public. None of these conditions apply now. And that makes mass protests a more important signal. And so yes it’s possible that that would change the way some Republican senators in swing states in particular are thinking about impeachment if they felt real concentrated public pressure and then it has this knock on effect as you’re saying about galvanizing people for the election. I think that what we’re going to see probably among Republicans a kind of switch to a process defense for Trump right as the case for impeachment gets stronger. Based on testimony like Bill Taylors and if this case for a real quid pro quo of withholding military aid becomes completely buttoned down then you’re going to start to see Republicans say well you know the election it’s only a year and change away we should just wait for that. And so then the rallies if they happen would become an important touchstone for that circumstance as well as for impeachment.


S12: One of the the things that I always come back to when presidential elections pop up or even when when any national action comes out plots is law. I’m gonna give you guys plots as law. Really you in on this. I’m ready. What’s his law is which ever side is having more fun. And then an election wins.


S5: So if you look at Ali’s are a sign of people having fun people and people having fun.


S10: If you if you look at 2016 there there was so much delight in the trolling of Hillary Clinton. There was so much I mean there was a nastiness to what Trump was doing but there was also a kind of exuberance to Trump his supporters and they had so much fun making fun of Hillary. 2010 same same with the Tea Party. There was this we’re part of the Tea Party movement. We have the Tea Party. The Tea Party movement and 28 2008 with Obama and the rallies around Obama. Similarly 92 with Clinton. There was this again this joyfulness and what Clinton was doing that got people excited. 1980 with Reagan. Whenever I look at where the kind of glee is and took 2018 Democrats had it. Again there was so much. It’s not just enthusiasm. It’s it’s Glee and Glee can have malice in it also. So. So there’s plenty there’s plenty of 2018 in 2010. There’s tons of malice but it is. Where is the where is the the kind of joy. And that’s I. And whenever I see that I’m like oh these guys are gonna win. And and so to me the point of the impeachment rallies is meh it might actually change voting on impeachment. Change may change the dynamics in that. But mostly it’s going to get people fired up and and and loose and they’re gonna have funny signs and great Yeah me hymns that are going to spill over into the 2020 election and that will help Democrats a lot.


S12: That’s Plotz as law.


S17: But the problem is that the people who are ironic and stuff like that plus is law RTM are people like you were saying I’m sorry John we’re talking yes you’re talking the law.


S18: What David is very pleased with himself right now.


S19: He is he’s having fun having been having Glee heavy Glee is likely to have the most fun. I win the podcast.


S7: Yes he’s having a little. He’s having glee. Meanwhile is somebody listening to the podcast has thrown their head set across the room and not for the first time.


S16: This is two reactions that one people who are ironic and and say sort look at things with a sideways glint of the kind that it seems to me is a precondition for the joy that you’re describing tend to maybe not be get out there and march types and that there’s probably a Twitter set there’s a there’s a kind of social media sapping that takes place where people feel like they can kind of say they’re witty thing on Twitter and move on.


S10: Secondly I interrupted you can I stop you there and you’re totally right about that for one thing. Which is a strong disagree based on the experience of both the gun rallies and the women’s market. I do not have any joy at gun rallies. Oh my God. You were absolutely wrong. If you if those were joyful occasions then it’s not that they’re it’s not that there isn’t somber but the collective fervor that we have to find. Anyway the pleasure of company and the end if you looked at what the signs were and the wit and the kind of the the way in which people interact in the way that people dressed. It was filled with I mean same thing with the Tea Party the Tea Party was it was at heart was a very dark movement in a lot of ways. There can be darkness in this. There’s a it’s that the kind of sense of collective fervor and enthusiasm and and connectivity that people feel is what I’m talking about.


S16: Well then if that’s your that’s a different definition of joy than I thought you would do using So under that definition. Sure. The choral area to the plots law is Nixon’s law which is whenever there is an organization aligned against acts that on X. When ever.


S8: But there are so many organizations aligned against everything.


S17: I’m like Well I don’t know this is a previous OK.


S20: OK.


S6: And just wrapping this up there. There were these efforts at impeachment rallies earlier they did not really work. How is it you think if they’re going to be impeachment rallies today that there will be an organizing principle for them what is it that actually will get people to show up in the streets around this as opposed to just being indignant about it which they clearly are.


S8: So I feel like until the Ukraine scandal impeachment was divisive unpopular and not clear like there just wasn’t a clear case for it and none of those things are true anymore. When you look at the polls when you look at the facts it’s just all much more galvanizing. So to me the everything that happened regarding impeachment discussions before like the end of September I think is just in a different box than what’s happening since then. This is about corruption. It’s pretty simple. And a lot of people don’t like corruption or at least like that’s been the American way in the past.


S12: Let’s go to cocktail chatter when you are gleefully maliciously planning your street protest in your local tavern. What would you be chattering to your friends about John Dickerson.


S9: Two things. One is the new york times piece called centrism is canceled high schoolers debate the impeachment inquiry and it’s about a Times piece about a challenge at high school and the debate they had about impeachment in the history class in which they had to actually behave not like dogs and not like people you know not the poo flinging engaged on in Twitter. And it’s an interesting piece that it contains this fact. Well I guess I will put this to the crowd. What do you all think is the percentage of adults who can name all three branches of government.


S6: Oh God. It’s gonna be really low.


S14: I want it to be like 80 80 percent 40 39. So David I just dropped the mike over here and they’ll be very interesting to see.


S17: What people so they can like. But do they know what they do and so forth.


S21: So that’s a kind of technical question like. I mean I have to marinate in this all the time but I mean I I know the answer. Just research everyone. Sometimes these are kinds of gotcha questions like you could understand that we have a judiciary a Congress and a president and not know that we call those things. There are three branches of government right.


S15: Yeah. It all depends on how the question is framed. That’s a quite a fair point.


S10: What do you think the wrong answers that people give out. Because I bet people say the military is a branch of government but that’s the if they’re asked.


S7: They might say that it was done by Annenberg at the Annenberg civics knowledge survey. We’ve talked about this before and whether and also then we should come back to it again probably some point but you know. So what’s the point. Like is this just who cares as Emily I think is implicit in what you’re saying which is OK maybe you can’t name them in the way either the pollster asks or maybe even in the way of perfectly divine design poll would ask but what if you understood the content.


S17: Is it more important to know there are three branches or understand that the government was formed with a with a system of shared powers and that it was meant to be slow and inefficient so that there would be minority rights and the majority wouldn’t wouldn’t run roughshod. And also that a minority wouldn’t be in control and then whether that’s under assault right now and so forth and so on.


S8: So anyway I would like I would like people to understand what they have the power to change through their vote. Like how are interlocking mechanism of separation of powers works they’ll have to know what it’s called I don’t care about that just like some sense of like the president picks judges the Senate confirms that like that’s how the third branch gets construct right.


S17: Just like some idea of what leads to what in the system that the more fun part of my chatter is a Twitter handle that I follow called History Lovers club and lovers is LV r s no vow.


S15: I think the no valley is this post great pictures and just little bits of joy in the middle of the day one that was posted this week was reasons for admission and these are the list of reasons for admission to a lunatic asylum in the eighteen hundreds and the tweet says it reads like a list of potential metal band names. Any deal includes things like immoral life ill treatment by husband egotism excessive sexual behavior the war time of life kicked in the head by a horse overtaxing mental powers political excitement I want to know the cases of the people who were admitted for these reasons anyway but I the bigger point is too.


S17: It’s a very enjoyable Twitter account to follow and so I encourage everyone to do so. LOL Beth What’s your chatter.


S21: I have a kind of trolling. David Plotz chatter Hey hey is my outrage of the week is about a bill that the Trump Golf Links and hotel in Ireland sent to the Irish police. Oh had to go. However I’m I’m gonna keep going. They had to cover this side trip that President Trump made to Ireland and this bill which comes to over a hundred thousand dollars is to the Irish police from Trump’s golf resort. And it has things not hit like eight hundred and seventy five. I don’t know if these are pounds or dollars for additional tea and coffee due to inclement weather. I am so apoplectic about things like this. It drives me crazy. I mean maybe as an American taxpayer I should be glad to know that is Irish taxpayers who are getting screwed this time.


S8: But the notion that you know we are having foreign governments pay into President Trump’s private properties for services that he demands I just it it just makes me furious.


S20: Yeah I can’t I should. Even you. SHERRY Well it was shocking. How can they do that. Welcome back. Read a view what’s what.


S12: If you’ve read any Tana French you know that the Irish cops say they’ve got so many important murders to follow.


S19: They can’t be exactly killed handle inclement weather.


S20: They don’t haul additional t that. There.


S13: The Dublin murder squad has work to do. My chatter is I thought Emily was surely going to chatter it but I’ll just do it because she didn’t. The amazing arguments that were made by President Trump’s personal lawyers this week in front of a judge.


S19: Oh my God. Have you heard about this.


S6: Yeah. So. So it’s a case involving President Trump’s tax returns. And he’s fighting a subpoena around this on grounds that he as president has absolute immunity from criminal indictment or investigation over his taxes and his attorney then said in response to a question from the judge the judge asked Well if President Trump stood in the middle fifth Avenue and shot somebody could local authorities investigate. Could they do anything about it. And Trump’s lawyer said no. That if the president murdered someone on Fifth Avenue with a gun no one could investigate that now. No one could pursue it.


S8: This isn’t about whether you could convict the president at trial during his tenure or even whether you can indict. You may not even investigate.


S6: That’s the position they’re taking the position is. Nothing can be done. And his lawyer William Kohn Savoy said that is correct. Nothing can be done. It is shocking. Do you think the Supreme Court’s going to uphold that. No.


S4: When they get I do not think that is a tenable legal position. I really hope not.


S9: I’m saying Emily is is there a way in which that could be an own goal which is to say you make a series of of stable and reasonable claims in the first three things you say.


S17: The fourth thing you say is so bonkers and at odds with the original conception of the job that it completely eviscerates the previous three things you said or can they just be. And that was stupid. You went too far. But you know the underlying your underlying claim is or your underlying defenses is a reasonable one.


S8: You can say Oh that’s stupid. You went too far. Your first three points are valid. The problem is they went to this point that because in this case it’s only about investigating the president. Right. We’re talking about whether the Manhattan district attorney can subpoena the tax returns of Trump for the purposes of an investigation. So they had to go there.


S6: That’s the problem. Your listeners you have also been sending us wonderful chatters at Slate gabfest you’ve been sending us stories that fascinated you. They’re tremendous. Again I say this every week. Just such a great set of things this week.


S1: I want to call out a tweet from it at Joe pie pail pie. Joe I’m sorry to mispronounce you if I have but it points to a piece on ESPN top comment about the fitness routines of chess grandmasters. So it’s about how people who play chess have to stay in fighting shape even though all they do is sit in front of a board and think and they basically don’t move for hours and hours and hours the piece is moderately interesting on the question of their fitness routine and how you know they eat protein and don’t take as much sugar and now they drink chocolate milk because that’s got a good mix of sugar and proteins in it blah blah blah. What was fascinating and it was the data on what happens to a grandmasters weight during a tournament and during these World Championship matches which take place over 10 days. These guys will lose 20 pounds even though they’re not doing anything. They’re just sitting. And the reason they’re losing 20 pounds is that the kind of even you think of oh the way you lose weight or the way that you drop calories is by intense physical activity actually intense mental activity and intense stress your body is working really really hard you’re metabolizing a ton and you just don’t want to eat. You also have a hard time taking in calories. And so they they were talking about the number two player in the world who’s not the only way is like a buck 60 to begin with will drop down 20 pounds drop a seventh or eighth of his body weight during a tournament.


S21: Clearly I’m just not thinking hard enough.


S3: I now had that same thought yeah definitely felt the same way as I read that. That is our show for today. The efforts is produced by just funk. Our researchers Bridget Dunlap a Caplin helped in D.C. today Ryan have helped the New Haven. Yes Emily was Ryan McCoy. Yes. And Allen Pang is in CBS with John Gabriel Roth is editorial director of Slate podcast June Thomas is managing producer. Please follow us on Twitter at Slate gabfest. Tweet chatter to us there was a tweet conundrums to us with a hashtag conundrum and if you can be in Oakland on December 18th please join us at the Fox Theater for our annual conundrum show. Slate dot com slash live. For tickets to that for Emily Bazelon and John Dickerson and David Plotz.


S22: Thanks for listening. We’ll talk to you next on Halloween.


S6: Hello Slate Plus how are you so. Slate Plus inspired today by John’s John’s inaugural effort at 60 Minutes which is a profile of Christine LeGarde the head of the IMF who is now going to run the European Central Bank. And my favorite moment in John Story which I commend it to you. For all reasons but a particular commended the last bit John notes something about Legarde which is that she apparently has this reputation for being able to fake drink wine that she doesn’t drink or even if you drink but she pretends to drink a lot more than you actually drinks. And so John while sitting and having a having a drink with her has her show how she pretends to drink and it’s fantastic how she likes you see her swirled the mind around sniff it you know. You know sort of make you know gesture really be interested in it. Paul put it up to her lips bake a swallow and then put the glass back down not having drank anything. It’s just it’s acting. It is acting at the highest level. So I wanted John to tell us how that came about and then we can talk about other ways to fake things.


S1: This will be rated G version. It’s not gonna be like this but I can get extremely graphic here. So your children.


S7: I hadn’t even considered that and now here we are. So yeah.


S15: Well I had read in a bunch of the profiles that she doesn’t drink when she’s on the job and she’s French first fall and has a house in Normandy and is just more is just incredibly French and I thought what a what a surprise that somebody who comes from a wine growing culture and is so French wouldn’t drink wine and then I thought well how does that how do you do that in a job where there is so much schmoozing and so much toast giving and all of that. And so there are a bunch of times in the interview. This is the only one that made it to that made it into the piece where I asked her to teach me something I said I also asked her to teach me. Part of what the profile was about and what she’s devoted her career to doing is lifting up women basically hiring them or insisting that she won’t go to meetings in which there are only men. And she did that both in the private sector as a lawyer and at the IMF and plans to do it at the European Central Bank. And so I said she talks about mentoring women and in these rooms full of men. So I said Okay I’m a woman I’m going into a room full of men. What do you what do you teach me like give me the. Give me your briefing before I go in. So that was also part of it anyway.


S17: So she showed us how to do that and I she does in fact drink wine but just not on the job because she wants to keep her wits about her.


S8: What do you guys do about food you don’t wanna eat when you’re at a dinner and you feel like people are sort of watching or you’re supposed to be politely eating food or you take a bite of something and it’s gross.


S15: What do you guys do. Is this a cappella is it. Yeah. Is it is it like at a friend’s house or you ate at you know dinner for the King of Sweden huh.


S21: Is the answer different in those two different. Yeah I guess it is. Well let’s let’s take either of them. I’ll take them both. I’m interested in both answers.


S13: I don’t think it’s that I don’t find that that hard. I mean I think once you’ve taken a bite of something it’s very hard to undertake the bite. So you.


S5: Well I’ve found no I have found no way to things out to get away from that part of it.


S1: But the. Not eating something that is on your plate is pretty easy because it all generally there’s in most situations like that there’s more than one thing on your plate and so you eat the things that you like and you kind of cut up the thing that you don’t like and push it around you deconstruct it slightly. So it’s not in its whole position it’s it’s broken up. The the chicken you’ve cut the chicken off the bone you have it actually eaten the chicken it’s just pushed around elsewhere on your plate and just looks kind of like a garbage fire has happened there but not that you haven’t eaten it. It’s just that you’ve oh you’ve you know you’ve just been a little bit messy and that’s that. That’s my strategy for things which are truly revolting John.


S7: If it’s not as somebodies private house eat it is acceptable to if you if you take a bite of something and it is just so awful that you think you might do injury to yourself in one form or another it is fine to discard it into your napkin discreetly discreetly. Yes of course. No you don’t hock it across the table.


S21: Maybe that’s the big napkins are actually for you know a corner of them and still have the rest of it.


S15: One summer I made money. I don’t even know if I made money actually but I worked in a restaurant folding napkins and running them through this very hot roller that flatten them out and iron them out and you would take the napkins out of the bin in which they’d been thrown to first wash them. And man when you opened up some of those napkins that surprises you would find it was like Cracker Jacks but in reverse anyway the. But I don’t know what you do it’s your best you know your best pal’s house and you take a bite of the you know delicious thing they’ve slaved over and it’s awful. You know some kind of ratted to to a mistake that they’ve taken a risk on the rat the rat and the red to Iraq and rat it doing so well yeah. And what do you do. I don’t know.


S13: All right what. All right let’s talk about another one of these which I think is how do you fake somebody fake recognizing someone you know you should know but you actually don’t remember who they are.


S8: It has to be someone I this one. So I do two things. One is that I play along desperately but the second is that I will ask my husband or someone just to if I have a second to go up and introduce themselves in front of me. So the person has to say their name like that is such a relief. If you can make that happen.


S21: My only problem in those moments is that I’m so like I’m so worried that I sometimes don’t even hear the person say their name then and then I have forgotten it again huh.


S17: This is my terror in life right. My former colleague Karen Cordy used to be and clarify who is now holds this same position. And they were very good at recognizing my absolute inability to remember my own name and my life anyone else’s. Yeah some. Sometimes I will get a discrete text reminding me of the name of my own children you know. But Carol once I can’t exactly remember the full nature of the gambit but I think she used another person to make an introduction of somebody to get them to say their names so that I would then remember it. It was it was masterful.


S6: What if you don’t what if there’s literally no way no one around. What if there’s nobody to be employed.


S16: Yeah yeah but people who do things like say hey chief Hey captain a doctor there’s a lot of that and once you once they say that oh man you know now my other one.


S10: How do you pretend to pay attention in a meeting either telephonically or in person where you’re basically not paying attention. I mean you guys don’t have that problem.


S8: Well I used to knit my way through classes as my way of dealing with this and it actually helped me concentrate. Oh that would be good lunch. Yeah. Yeah. I have so much nervous loose energy and I’m such a fidget Ah. And so it both saved my fingernails from oblivion and actually like calm down enough that I could listen.


S10: So. So I find my true sin which I confess I have committed on the show occasionally is is it.


S6: I know that each of you has committed it to relapse and you do it too. You know one of you was talking the conversations going on and I’m kind of like checking my email and checking ahead in my script or whatever just to see what we can talk about next. But sometimes I’m just checking my email or texting somebody and yet I have to maintain the pretense that I’m paying attention to this meeting or this conversation.


S8: Don’t you catch the very last thing one of us says Isn’t that like when my kids accuse me of not paying attention I can usually spit back like the last five words only now they know and they’re like guess what came before that.


S6: Yes I do.


S21: When I work for you I would get because I you know for after a while I didn’t work in the same office as you would get on the phone and I would be seeing some hash and things like otherwise why are you on the phone with your boss.


S18: And there would be this silence. And I was like yeah yeah. David you’re not paying attention and I’ll be like OK. So you just I just said all that and you weren’t listening and you are like OK you’re right I’m sorry. And then I was OK because you were just this is such a good quality of yours that you apologized immediately.


S6: So I was like OK you just I mean it’s so the discipline you have to have if you’re me and you’re kind of on your it’s just you have to close your computer. For me it’s that act of will of closing the computer will focus my attention. But it’s really hard.


S8: Do you feel that your listening skills have deteriorated over time. Because I absolutely feel this way. It’s yes it has to do with the distraction of our devices but it’s also that literally sitting and listening to a lecture or even sometimes like a podcast in the car. Like everyone around me will be absorbing information and it will just be like just not penetrating my brain. Yeah.


S6: Yes.


S17: Since I have to do it for a living I try to work on that. The way I would work on like physical fitness because it’s it’s super true and it’s so much harder than it used to be because people are particularly in public interview settings on a in a political context. People are far the sense of shame and going back to the Zuckerberg conversation the the downside of lying in public has almost disappeared for certain people. So you’re having to watch out for people saying things that are just completely what used to be completely out of bounds. My biggest problem is at a public setting not listening to the conversations of other tables because a people are loud bores and b I have it is a it is I’m incapable of not hearing what other people are saying. And so it’s very hard to come. It was hard to focus on the conversation at hand.


S8: Even if you’re with your most darling intended when somebody at the next table is you know flapping their blueberry all around the table I have a theory about this which is that it’s end of what in the end being me if you were raised in a large family in which there was constant chatter and distraction actually you just block all that out. So David and I were recently in a cafe together and he was totally listening to a quite interesting conversation behind us.


S18: And I had no idea that was happening whatsoever.


S10: That is true. I did my number one listening mechanism is to go for a walk that if I’m going for a walk with somebody I can hear. That’s fine. It’s it’s being immobile sitting sitting and passively receiving is really hard.


S8: And that is such a good track and clue. I completely agree with you.


S23: But also you feel better. Yeah I bet there is a system for it if in fact maybe I’ve looked for it but for people who have to listen and I’m trying to think of a what a job would be. So maybe crisis hotlines might be like this although that in that case you’re just listening for one thing. But for people who interrogators may be in like the CIA or in murder cases and stuff who have to listen with a supreme and constant acuity if there is a thing like a memory palace for staying stuck in conversation so that one could practice as a way of trying to improve this.


S19: But the other thing would help in improving the listening skill is if people in say such pitiful I was going to ask him one other faking question but I think that’s typical. Let’s end on TiVo.


S6: Yeah. All right. By Slate Plus.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your slate plus membership. Enjoy.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for November 21st, twenty nineteen the In the Loop edition.


S3: I’m David Plotz of Atlas Obscura, taping from a hotel room overlooking Times Square in Manhattan, in Gotham, in New York City, joined by, of course, Emily Basilone of Yale Law School and The New York Times Magazine. Hello, Emily. Where are you?


S4: I’m in New Orleans, which is lovely and nice and warm, too. I’m excited about that. Wow.


S5: And John is who knows where. Maybe he’s in Orleans, too. We don’t even know, but he’s not here. But instead, we have Gab Fest, regular cat fest, regular sub. Jose Duffie Rice, president of the appeal from her home in Brooklyn, probably. Hello, Jose. How are you?


S6: Hi. I’m actually at my home in Atlanta. But RG3, you’re not in Brooklyn anymore. Dang it. I am not. I am in Atlanta, which is not like Brooklyn, but did host the Democratic debate last night. So we are, you know, on the map.


S7: That kind of puts us on the map, jersey. It’s not why you’re on the show, but actually it makes us all seem like a little more with it this morning.


S8: Very coordinated. On today’s gabfest. Gordon Sunland drops a bomb at the impeachment hearing. Then Democrats debate again in Atlanta with Jose as mayor Pete surges. Is his surge going to last? Is he now the front runner? Then, should Stephen Miller be fired for his pretty White House e-mails where he circulated white nationalist ideas and racist ideas and general awfulness? Plus, we will, of course, have cocktail chatter. So everyone was in the loop. Emily. Were you in the loop, though?


S9: What about the whole quid pro quo ever? That’s what Gordon sunland’s said when he testified on Wednesday. I wish you a loop.


S10: I was not in the loop. I clearly wasn’t in the loop, since I don’t even know which loop you are talking about.


S4: But it was really interesting to hear Sunlen implicate Pompeo and our vice president, Mike Pence and Mick Mulvaney and to assert that this was actually an official channel.


S7: It wasn’t the child diplomacy that the career professional diplomats thought they were working, at least until they kind of figured out what was going on. But, you know, according to Sunland, these were direct orders from President Trump. And that makes sense that his top officials would be read in on those orders.


S5: So, Jose, I’m sure you were in the loop because you were in Atlanta. But what what do you think is the most important thing we learned from this week’s impeachment testimony, particularly the testimony from Trump lickspittle Gordon Sunland?


S6: Yeah, it was interesting watching Saw online yesterday because he struck me, especially in the beginning of his testimony as someone who really didn’t have anything to hide.


S11: He was, you know, pretty straightforward about the way that this went down and the number of people who are involved. And he said explicitly, right. This was a quid pro quo. Rudy Giuliani was acting on on behalf of the president. And if the question is whether or not this was a quid pro quo, there is no question. And everybody who was involved, I think about him talking about how the president said this isn’t a quid pro quo, a sort of a way attempt to exonerate himself prematurely. And it seems like soslan kind of was onto this a little a little on the late side. But but clearly has been, you know, is not one of those people who is going to defend the president at any cost.


S5: So, Emily, someone said explicitly that there was a quid pro quo for the White House meeting between Zelinsky and Trump, but that he didn’t come out and say for certain that there was a Q P Q as I write myself as a quid pro quo about the military aid that had been appropriated by Congress. And that seems to me and not credible. And not credible claim, but it may be that he he doesn’t know that it existed, but he was not willing to come out and say that it existed yesterday. Is that important?


S12: I think it is kind of well, it’s somewhat important. I mean, if you’re following the Sandlin line of evolving testimony, it’s important and perhaps you will evolve further. I thought what he said was that Trump didn’t explicitly confirm that, that he presumed that was why the military aid was being frozen. But he hadn’t heard that from Trump’s mouth. Whereas he had heard that with the meeting. And I mean, it it doesn’t.


S13: I guess part of what one is grappling with here is the if someone’s being clear in all their implications, but they’re using code words like investigations or they don’t explicitly say what the other half of the payback scheme is or the bribery scheme to use the Democrats word then is if. But everyone assumes everyone knows that’s what they mean. Does that really let Trump off the hook? And I think that when you look at Bill Taylor’s testimony in which he was, you know, saying to Stalin, like, look, this is what’s going on. It seems like everyone was read. And it was clear this did also involve the military aid. And when Trump is saying, now I want nothing be or I wanted nothing, which he seems quite devoted to this line of defense, then you have this problem that he own, that Sandlin only made it clear there is no quid pro quo after it was coming to light that they were withholding the military aid.


S7: And, you know, there’s this whole question that we’ve talked about before a little bit about whether an attempted crime is still a crime. And I just wanted I liked this tweet from Rachel Barkow, who’s a law professor at NYU. She was saying, OK, here’s my one criminal law review of attemped law person who pointed a gun at the bank teller with a bag for the money in his hands and suddenly realizes that he’s being watched on security camera, says to the teller, I want nothing. Guess what? Still an attempted robbery. So that’s another sort of piece of this to keep in mind.


S1: Yeah, it’s interesting because.


S11: Being like studying criminal law, but also studying actual criminal cases, it’s so clear that in any court this would hold up, as you know, in an illegal act attempt. I mean, also conspiracies or it. Last night, Kamala Harris referenced the scandal in Ukraine as a criminal enterprise, basically signaling that the president and a lot of the people who work for him knew what was going on and went forward with it with that knowledge. And I thought it just so you know, just saying this isn’t a quid pro quo doesn’t get you out of what they say. It’s bribery. Right. But it might actually get Donald Trump out of impeachment. It’s very clear that most of the party is willing to die on whatever hill he provides for them to die on. And it’s one of the times, right, when you would think getting fired from your job would be a lower standard than getting prosecuted in criminal court. But as we can see, it seems like that’s not necessarily the way that this is going to play out.


S5: My favorite detail from the testimony from Scotland on Wednesday was his point that it didn’t matter to Trump that the investigations be carried out, only that they’d be announced, which is, if you think about it, so, so revelatory about what Trump wanted done. It didn’t. The corruption was a matter of complete indifference to him. It was simply the optical political point. So, I mean, Jose, you you just hit and hit on this a minute ago. But it’s it seems very unlikely that just because some former lacky ambassador to the EU had said there’s a quid pro quo, that now.


S14: Republican senators are going to fall over themselves and give up on their defenses of President Trump and be like, well, we we will certainly convict him in a trial.


S5: It seems that there will be a new Republican line of defense. What is that line of defense going to be, Emily?


S15: The line of defense is, okay, this happened or maybe it happened. They may have to hold on to the maybe there, since Trump is so insistent that it did not. But it’s OK.


S12: It doesn’t rise to the level of removal. And it’s just the president directing policy. In fact, the fact that everybody was read in. Means this was official White House policy and the president was simply leveraging his relationship with Ukraine to get something that was perfectly OK for him to ask for, i.e. looking for false information about his political opponent. But if you don’t say the last part out loud or you say the Bidens deserved this because what Hunter Biden was doing was improper or illegal, then the rest of it seems somewhat plausible as a defense.


S11: So my guess is that they will make up whatever defense they need because there is sort of no sense from the Republican Party that it has to follow from their previous statements that it has to be reasonable. It just has to exist. The standards are so bottom of the barrel at this point for how they are willing to defend the president. I think the first thing that was brought up yesterday was sort of Biden or Obama or Hillary by it, by the president. I was hired by the Republicans. I can’t remember exactly which of their scapegoats they were pulling out. But it’s it is. You know, I thought Ken White on Twitter had an interesting post yesterday, which was basically like their defenses screw you like it is on everything else right there. It’s pretty shameless.


S5: What I also find so demoralizing are the disgusting attacks on the public servants who are acting here, including people who were until five minutes ago, people in totally good standing within Trump world. So, Gordon, someone is somebody who is treated until until a week ago as somebody who is a Trump close associate. He’s a Trump crony of the highest order and someone with firsthand knowledge. And immediately as soon as he testifies, he is he is spurned as a hack, as unreliable, someone who didn’t take notes a as it is a dumbo. And then more impressively, you have this parade of public servants who have testified earlier from Ben Men to Jennifer Williams, George Kent and Bill Taylor, and the smearing of these honorable people who have spoken up at huge cost themselves and their careers is just shocking. And and it’s incredible that you have a Republican Party that is so willing to make roadkill out of people who are truly acting honorably in the interests of the best interests of the country at great cost themselves. And it’s I mean, I said this on the show last week. I think one of the true long term prices that we will pay for what’s happening with impeachment is that public service, particularly public service at the highest level in the White House is just going to become less and less attractive. And the quality of people you’re going to attract is lower and lower because it is people are being shamed and and attacked for for behaving and completely honorable ways to protect the country. And that’s incredibly depressing.


S4: Well, I just have to focus on Scotland for a minute. I’m so confused by him. I had this idea that he was like this guy who never meant to get into the middle of this must be ruing every moment that he ever, like, thought about Donald Trump. You know, it just that he would be dying to get home and kind of scurry off the stage and be ashamed. And it wasn’t like that at all. I mean, Joses. Right. He seemed comfortable. He seemed to kind of be into being the center of attention. And I don’t know, for me, it’s it’s coming at such a reputational cost. I mean, he seems like someone who, if not outright lied, admitted many pertinent facts, can’t remember anything like you did all this kind of dirty work for Trump. It’s so incongruous to me, his seeming relaxed nature as he trots back to Europe to continue doing this ambassadorial job. And my notion of how he should or would have responded.


S16: DOBBS Well, I mean, I think you presume there’s a sense of shame that still exists and people.


S9: One of the things that they do, because I feel strongly you feel a sense of shame. Yes. On is not somebody who would take a job in the Trump administration, are you right?


S7: It’s like I thought I didn’t realize the shame being dead had spreads beyond Donald Trump down to Gordon Sandlin. It’s just a different way of thinking about the choices you’re making and the situation you’re in. Which is foreign to me. But you’re right. Yes, it does reflect that same shamelessness that Trump has.


S8: Dear West Coast Gabfest listeners, don’t forget we have a conundrum show. Our annual conundrum shows Can we live at the Fox Theater in Oakland, California on Wednesday, December 18th? And Adam Savage of Mythbusters is going to join us as a special guest. We always have a special guest for The Conundrum Show to provide exterior wisdom and counsel to a confused gabfest audience. So please join us if you can be in Oakland on December 18th at the Fox Theater. Go to Slate.com, slash live. You can also tweet to us with the hashtag conundrum at Slate Gabfest or give us a conundrum at slate.com. Slash conundrum to we’ve gotten so many great conundrums from you all. I was just looking glancing through the conundrum list. There was one. Would you rather only be able to get advice from your kids or never be able to give advice to your kids again as a choice?


S1: Oh, God, that’s a great question. That is a really great question, I think.


S17: I’m glad your two year olds giving you advice, Jose.


S11: He told me to go play mama the other day, which was his way of saying, leave me alone. I think I’m going to have to go with never give my kid advice. I’m going to have to throw him under the bus on this one. I don’t think I can live by his by his by his rules.


S8: So if you want to hear the discussion of such thing and such fascinating questions, please come to our live shows like dot com slash live for tickets December 18th in Oakland at the Fox Theater. The thirty seventh Democratic debate was Wednesday night in Atlanta. I didn’t even know it was in Atlanta until Jose told us earlier, but it was in Atlanta and it wasn’t notably filled with fireworks. It was another debate. There were a bunch of candidates there. Things happened.


S16: So Biden seems to remain kind of the zombie candidate. The zombie campaign to the debate reflect that. Or did did Biden appear to come out of that debate with any more strength than he went into it?


S1: Jose, what did you think?


S11: You know, I thought that well, he started Biden started really rough. The first two sentences out of his mouth felt very stuttering like you. If he felt very out of it, I think he had some good answers last night. I didn’t think it was as bad as some of his other performances. I will say that the moment where he says that the only African-American woman to ever be elected to the Senate has endorsed him and Kamala Harris is standing on stage, was so painful and embarrassing.


S4: Ellen Unhand give him the benefit of doubt. He just misspoke. He meant to say, first woman, senator, not only woman, senator. And then on the other hand, it’s like, dude, how did you get that wrong? Like Kamala Harris is standing right there. Like Reiser, she is. And. Right. And then on the third hand, does it matter that he misspeaks like this? I mean, his heart’s in the right place. It’s not like he isn’t pleased that a second black woman was elected to the Senate. I don’t know. I just go back and forth.


S6: Here’s a guy who’s obviously smart, I think has been capable and maybe still is to some extent capable. And that just seems a few beats behind the rest of the field in terms of being able to think on his feet, being able to sort of assess what’s going on on stage and answering questions in a way that feels to the point and frankly coherent in the moment.


S4: It’s quite galling to watch it because you just feel sorry for him, but also really frustrated.


S6: And if you know that this is an issue for you. Right. If you know that the issue, your issues are on. I mean, the other moment he had last night was where he said the thing about domestic violence. He said we’re going to keep punching at it and punching at it. You know, it just is like, yeah, it’s just like you almost had to work to find an analogy that terrible. It just so clearly the worst analogy you could use. And what it says to me is that he doesn’t seem adequately conscious of the landmines he has proven himself to be likely to step into. He didn’t really seem contrite after that moment of kind of a racing Carmilla. He didn’t seem to realize that terribleness of the metaphore. It just seems like where everybody else is like, whoa, man, he’s he’s kind of walking obliviously ahead.


S8: The biggest news that I saw in the campaign this week is the boot adjudge surge. And his pulling ahead and seeming to be pulling ahead in Iowa. His sir, the sign of the surge that I have identified is that I no longer need to write out his name phonetically to remember how to pronounce it. It’s been said to me so many times that I can just actually say it without having to write it phonetically. So that’s that suggests to me he’s on his way to victory. Emily, what is it that’s going on that has been adjudge up in Iowa? And does that reflect something that is a big movement in the campaign?


S7: I mean, I think it must be the softening of Biden’s support in Iowa and the kind of casting about for a more youthful version of Biden, who is on the moderate ish side of this primary field and also is a white man.


S18: Just to bang on to that. So do you think that this is what’s going on? Is that there’s a kind of.


S16: Growing sense of concern in the center. The center left the more moderate elements of the Democratic Party for a candidate who is not Biden and is to the right of Warren or Sanders.


S11: Yeah, absolutely. I think that Bhuta a judge kind of represents this young guy who kind of has at least relatively similar politics, who’s quote unquote pragmatic and is newer to the scene. It’s actually not particularly surprising to me that he’s surging in a place like Iowa, especially because of his own sort of geographic roots. I think what happens after Iowa will be the real the real question of whether or not he can maintain some momentum here.


S16: So both Warren and BRIGID should certainly the media darlings and the elite darlings of the race have almost no support from African-Americans who are the most important large voting bloc. You can identify the Democratic Party. So, Josie, what what to make of that? Do you think this is something that if one of them wins Iowa, wins New Hampshire, Lee becomes a front runner, that African-American voters will fourth full throatedly move over to one of them? Or do you think they have problems with African-American voters that that go deeper than just not being Biden?


S6: Well, I think that’s two very different situations with the judge and Warren. I mean, but a judge has repeatedly made, I guess the I guess the like political word would be gaffes with the black community, including this week, with this having what was it for a hundred people signed on in South Carolina.


S11: Black support for the black ible who supported him. Turns out half of them weren’t black. A lot of them didn’t support him. Just sort of repeated misunderstandings of how to engage with this voter bloc. That obviously matters significantly. Warren doesn’t seem to have make those same sort of mistakes right. She’s garnered a lot of support from prominent black women, including like a lot of black activists. And so I don’t I don’t think that the struggles that they are facing moving forward are going to be the same. I do think that, like, they both are going to have to increase their level, the support that they’re getting from black communities and some other demographics as well. But I don’t think that people to judge approach to doing that has proven to be sustainable. And I don’t think Warren has that same problem.


S16: Emily, Amy Klobuchar, who is also positioning herself to be the the non Biden moderate alternative to Warren Sanders. At Bridges this week and implying that a woman with his credentials would never be a serious presidential candidate. That seems like true, right?


S1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. You know, there’s this sense where it’s like someone like you to judge where it’s like, here’s we found him.


S11: Here’s this guy who obviously has meant for, you know, the White House. And we’re willing to just overlook the fact that he has done nothing to indicate that he is capable of holding this position. Granted, like he’s more qualified than Donald Trump. So the standard right now is very low. But this sense of like, wow. Aren’t we lucky we got him in? You know, aren’t we lucky that he’s decided to show up and and take on this this test, even though he’s not qualified? No one ever says that when women take on, you know, big roles that they’re not qualified for, it’s never sort of a sense of aren’t they brave or aren’t they lucky?


S15: Well said. Yeah. I mean, the thing that gets me about but a judge every time is that he has one eighty five hundred votes like that’s how many votes it took for him to become the mayor. And that’s that’s little bitty. I just worry about that. Right.


S5: So when you look at this field, the all the leaning Democratic candidates come with some obvious problem.


S14: They’re too liberal, they’re too young, they’re too old. Bhuta Judge when is rarely talked about. He’s a would be the first gay president. Probably that’s not gonna be too much of a big deal during election, but who knows every potential candidate. People find a thing to get anxious and worked up about around their identity in a way that seems both deeply wrongheaded and hugely unproductive and often racist or sexist.


S16: What are we. Emily, as voters to do about that?


S4: Right. Well, I think there’s the what. The tricky part here is that it’s totally acceptable to worry about the political consequences of someone’s identity in a way that you think could boomerang against them and against winning the election.


S15: The problem is that it quickly starts to bleed into creating the reality that you are worried it exists outside of you. And I don’t know what we do about that exactly, because every time we start hand-wringing about this, we just kind of add fuel to the fire.


S16: Do you guys think you have Cory Booker and Kamala Harris, the two leading African-American candidates in the race? Deval Patrick is coming in. Booker and Harris have not gotten anywhere, as really. I mean, they both both their campaigns are flagging. Do you think either of them has a chance to revive their campaign or are they are they done and dusted by now?


S11: Well, I don’t think it’s impossible at all, especially for Harris. I think it’s really difficult. And to your point, like I think being a black candidate in Iowa, it has been done right. It’s been done once. It’s not the most consistently progressive state in the nation, especially around issues like race. It’s definitely not close to one of the more diverse states in the nation, to Emily’s point about the politics. It is worth engaging with the consideration that part of the reason her campaign and also Booker’s campaign perhaps are struggling is because of their race. And also. And Carmela’s and Carmela’s situation also maybe because of her gender. Obviously, it doesn’t necessarily map that way across the board, but it certainly seems to be a variable that does have an impact.


S16: Tom Etzel had this very interesting piece, Tom Ansel’s always very thought provoking in The New York Times, arguing that Warren is going to be a major drag on Democrats and swing states down ballot Democrats in swing states. If she is the nominee, she will be a real problem for the party as the nominee because she is so far to the left, too. Emily, I know we’ve talked a little bit about this. Do you think that the Medicare for all plan is going to turn out to have been just a catastrophic error that she has locked herself into a policy dream that’s unachievable, which she did?


S4: She did.


S19: I would say a little bit give herself or try to give herself some wiggle room this week when she talked about initially proposing a plan to basically have a public option, a way to choose to get onto Medicare, and then introducing a full on Medicare for all Bill in her third year in office. That was at least a little space between her and Bernie Sanders proposal.


S15: I mean, I do really wonder about the politics of making this a centerpiece of her campaign for a long time. It wasn’t that centerpiece. But now the amount of money she’s proposing on spending this is so enormous that it begins to overshadow her other spritely plans. And I do wonder about whether she has moved too far to the left on this. And the problem for downstream candidates could be significant. What she would say, her strip standard line about this is, you know, we have to push we have to fight for big things because it’s the same amount of fight, whether you try to do something smaller, big. So let’s have the big fight. I don’t know if I buy that, but that’s the response.


S16: Yeah, I think it’s. I really think is an interesting question, because on the one hand. Yes, she’s right. It’s a really interesting idea as a as a potential solution for the health care crisis. It’s you know, it’s it’s a model that done in other countries and it works. On the other hand, given where we are as a country right now, it seems grandiose. And the cost to the budget number associated with it is so ridiculously high that it I think that’s all anyone sees. It makes her seem unrealistic and alienates the bunch of moderates. And it feels to me that it was a totally unnecessary move that she didn’t have to lock herself to, that she didn’t have to come up with a specific plan. I know her her brand is coming up with plans, but I think she could have alighted that and ducked around that for longer than she did. And now it is going to be the first sentence and every attack on her from the right. And everybody is going to say whatever X trillions is what she wants to spend. She’s a dreamer. She’s delusional. How can you take her seriously? And and that’s a terrible shame because she’s the smartest person in the race and also the best policy person in the race. And and policy isn’t even that bad. It’s just just that the country isn’t there yet. I feel like it’s a it’s one of these cases, which is like a two something where she is in a better world. This would be a legitimate proposal that would be well considered and people would be very excited about it and it would be debated. But we don’t live in that world. And so now it’s just a a cross to bear for her for the rest of the race.


S6: I do think that one of Elizabeth Warren’s attractive qualities to voters is that she is willing to say, you know, willing to say what she believes and go for the bold thing and not be apologetic about it or evade the question. So while I think she is in a messy position with this medical care for all thing to some extent, I also think the other position was untenable for her or it felt like she was sort of avoiding the question and that she didn’t have a plan when you have made yourself the candidate who is willing to speak truth to power. You know, for the working man and always having a plan. And then your health care answers are kind of wishy washy and vague. I don’t actually know how sustainable of a strategy that was for her because it’s it seemed to it seemed to be so perpendicular to her personality.


S16: Slate plus members get bonus segments on this, your dear gabfests and on another Slate podcast, ghostlike dot com slash gabfests. Plus to sign up today. And we are going to do our plus segment today about South Dakota’s interesting new anti-meth campaign. It might be pro math, not clear some. It’s about math.


S18: In any case, we’re in talk about that ghostlike dot complex gap as plussed to sign up today and hear that segment.


S3: The president’s homunculus on immigration. Stephen Miller got in trouble this week. Emily, what did we learn about him over the last couple of weeks that we didn’t know before?


S15: Yeah, well, we confirmed things we knew already. How about that? Katie McCue, an erstwhile bright BART writer who has left the far right behind, leaked a ton of e-mail she had from Stephen Miller from before he went into the White House. This is when Miller was Jeff Sessions, his top aide. It’s a different era in which being the most restrictive senator on immigration was actually like a fringe view. Okay. I mean, Jeff Sessions introduced this anti-immigration bill before Trump was in office and he was the only senator in his committee to sign onto it, including among Republicans. Miller was trying really hard at the time to get Session’s attention. It was kind of hard to get attention for this guy. And he had this. These relationships are bright, Bart, and he was feeding them incendiary materials from this white nationalist site, VDARE, and from other sources that disgusting French novel, The Camp of the Saints, which blames the demise of Europe on immigrants.


S4: You know, these are really gross sources. I don’t think there’s anything surprising about finding out about these emails. It all tracks with reporting I was doing before the election about sessions and these kind of deep anti-immigrant views. There’s also a ton of discussion of the 1924 immigration restrictions which were responsible for changing the country based quotas in a way that reduce the number of immigrants from Italy and Eastern Europe, i.e. reduce the number of Jewish immigrants as well as African immigrants and other people of color. Not that that was the word people used at the time, but these were quotas put in place to try to preserve the North American Anglo-Saxon stock of the United States.


S15: We knew previously that Sessions was in love with these restrictions because he talked about them on the radio at the time. There is the kind of deep horror, I would say, in the fact that Stephen Miller’s own family is Jewish immigrants from Belarus, much like parts of my family in this way that I just find so unsettling and upsetting to have someone, a Jew acting like this and saying these things I just like.


S4: So don’t understand it and wish that was not his identity. And and yet to see all of this confirmed and to see this strategy, he was working out with Bright Bart. It’s sort of a major piece of evidence about where he stands. And then I think the weird, confusing part of this is that these are also views Donald Trump has expressed. So calls that Stephen Miller should resign and leave the White House are accusing him of holding views that his boss holds. Why would they fire him since it’s kind of all of a piece? They’re weirdly kind of sort of denying it and accusing the Southern Poverty Law Center, which published the emails of libeling him and standing against bigotry. Like, what does that even mean?


S16: Well, I think what’s to me, what’s incongruous here, what you’re hitting at at the end there, Emily, you’re punching at your punching and punching in is. Gee, thank you. Is that we already know. Miller by his deeds, he is everything he’s done is worse. He is the architect of removing temporary protected status for hundreds of thousands of people from Central and Latin America. He’s the architect of separating migrant families and putting children in cages. He’s the architect of stopping rolling back DACA. He’s a monster and what he does in the open.


S5: So I am I certainly am not surprised by what he did in secret before he had this role. But it is it does seem it does seem odd that the reason that he people think he should be banned from the administration is that he sent a bunch of emails with links in that to a bunch of right wing journalists back in 2015. Just look at what he’s done in 2017, 2018, 2019 to actually ruin the lives of millions of people. That’s all the evidence we need about why he should be fired, right?


S6: I mean, he’s a white nationalist. We know that. We know, you know, that last month in America, we resettled not one refugee, which is the first time that that’s happened. And I think I mean, literally decades and decades we are living in a time where a white nationalist is president. Many of the people who were on his policies are white nationalist. And, you know, by the way, Jeff Sessions is also a white nationalist. And so Stephen Miller like is that’s why he was hired. Right. It’s not just like a side part of his personality. He has literally has the job he has. Because he is willing and ready to at any given moment keep immigrants out of this country, make it impossible for them to get in and especially immigrants of color and maintain what he wants, which is or create what he wants, which is a country of white people and of white people in power. It’s the emails to me. I mean, I do think it is remains interesting that nobody in the party is calling for him to to be fired. That this level of racism has been accepted. Just, you know, completely by the Republicans. But the emails themselves, it’s like what else would you expect him to be e-mailing about?


S16: Well, I think that Jose that gets at a really interesting point, which is that mainstream conservatism, which does not really exist anymore, sort of mainstream conservatism, no longer has the capacity to respond to this. It’s like all of its defenses, its entire immune system has been destroyed by having associate. It’s also strongly with Trump or having walked away from the party. So there’s no legitimacy left. There’s no anti-racist right to speak of anymore. It’s completely marginalized, which is terrible, which is a shame that we need. There needs to be a place in the conservative movement for pro-immigrant positions and mean conservatives themselves should want it because actually there’s no reason why immigrants are necessarily going to end up liberal or progressive. There’s a long history in this country of, in fact, immigrant groups becoming pretty conservative as they as they spend time here. And the fact that the right has no interest in absorbing immigrants and in thinking about their them as contributors to the country and in thinking about them as contributors to politically is is really unhealthy for the political system because there. It just it means that the conservative movement will just get further and further and further alienated from immigration in a way that is completely toxic. And it will and will ultimately lack the capacity is already seen to respond to what are clearly outrageous racist behaviors.


S15: Is there a problem here for liberals and Democrats, too, in the sense that it’s becoming hard to figure out how to call for limits on immigration that don’t seem like they’re just about keeping Brown and people out of the country? Right. Like we used to have a kind of center discussion of immigration. Not so long ago, President Obama talked this way in which you emphasized border security.


S4: You talked about the idea that people have to wait in line and you weren’t accused of being a racist. And I fear that given how divided Americans are about immigration, that if liberals lose any capacity to talk about limits and everything gets associated with white nationalism, that’s a problem. You know, unless you’re going to be for open borders and I think in the end, these politicians are not. There has to be some way to try to bridge these gaps and these kinds of revelations about the anti-immigrant forces. It’s important to understand their intellectual legacy is. I completely agree with that. And yet I feel like the discourse about this is so polarized on both sides and maybe because it’s because that center right is missing the way you’re talking about David. But I also feel like liberals are pouncing on the rhetoric without figuring out how to talk about this in a way that doesn’t sound like they just want to let in every single person who wants to come.


S1: Yeah, it’s interesting.


S6: It feels like I feel like that’s been a problem among Democrats for a while, just not really having a cohesive kind of theory behind immigration policy that can be translated to the voting public in a way that makes sense. I mean, what you can say for Donald Trump, right. And the Republicans, as you know, their policy might be racist and inhumane, but at least it’s straightforward. And that, you know, that they have like that going for them. It it does strike me, though, that like the alternative position may be that any improvement on immigration is an improvement from these people. Right. Any improvement on immigration may be, you know, any more progressive view on immigration might be tenable for the the left, given that the standard right now is separate, kids from their families refuse to allow refugees in the country and hire a guy who sent emails from what is essentially like a right wing blog, you know, conspiracy theory blog, that only tenant is the supremacy of white people. So to your point, Emily, I think it’s just sort of interesting. Interestings Rosen I think it’s sort of horrifying to see.


S11: What people are willing to put up with. Right. Like what voters are willing to put up with what legislators are willing to put up with and how little this moves the needle for the right, which just a few years ago had also a more compassionate perspective on immigration, a more compassionate perspective that still was overly restrictive.


S16: I want to close this topic actually with just something I was thinking about, which is this these calls for Trump to drop Miller. Obviously, it’s going to go nowhere. There’s no chance of it. But I was thinking, has Trump ever dropped any close adviser or close person for being worse than expected? And that has not happened except for Rob Porter, who the claims of spousal abuse against Rob Porter, who is a White House official couple of years ago. You may remember the only reason people get bounced out of the Trump Universe is for not being sufficiently loyal or because you stop serving your purpose. It’s never because you’re a monster. There are tons of monsters who have served him, who’ve done outrageous things. But they’re never there, never bounced for being a monster. They’re bounced for other reasons. So Steven Miller may one day be out of favor with Trump, but it won’t be because he’s a white nationalist and a racist. It’ll be because, you know, it said something. He didn’t sufficiently defend Trump on something that Trump cared about at that moment.


S6: Think where Rob Porter would be today. I don’t know that today. He would even, you know, be removed.


S7: It’s it’s really it was John Kelly who drummed out Rob Porter, presumably. Right. And it’s hard to imagine Miss Mulvany doing that if Trump was against it. Right.


S6: Right. Yeah. It just seems you’re right. I mean, it there are. The only thing that matters to this man is loyalty to him as honestly unbelievable shop on the Sunday shows and live for Trump and stand by him when he arguably quits. Pretty severe crimes. I think he’ll be fine.


S16: All right. Let’s go to cocktail chatter. When you are. It’s on a Sunday show line for whatever cause your line for Emily and you afterwards, you’re like, I need a drink. That was too much line. What are you going to chatter about?


S7: As you know, as our listeners may know, John Bell Edwards, the Democratic candidate for governor in Louisiana, won this week. And I was struck by a tweet from Nick GORR, of which he posted pictures of some of the ads that ran against John Bell Edwards that are all really dark and scary ads about criminals. They some of them are immigrant criminals. Some of them are black criminals. Doesn’t really matter. The ideas like John Edwards is letting everybody out of prison to roam the streets. And what Nikolaevich pointed out was that these ads didn’t work this time and that actually Edwards had strong turnout by the Democratic base and crossover voting from Trump voters.


S15: I was paying attention this because it’s just these sorts of advertisments have been incredibly wildly successful in so many elections in America in fear mongering and also in making policy. And the idea that they could fall flat is tantalizingly exciting. Now, obviously, this is just one election and it’s not a tactic that’s going away. But in this moment of falling crime, when Louisiana actually where I happen to be sitting is enacting criminal justice reform, doesn’t seem to want to be the number one Carswell state in the country. Perhaps we’re actually seeing some kind of shift.


S18: Jose, what is your chatter?


S6: So I’m reading this book called For the Love of Men by Liz Plank that I expected to like. But I’m like even more than I thought I would.


S11: It’s sort of focused on how are how harmful masculinity also harms men and how in order to rethink what a world of gender equality looks like, we actually have to have more compassion and more understanding of how men are harmed in our social constructions of masculinity. It’s extremely well done and very thought provoking. Already gave a copy to my parents and plan on reading excerpts of it to my 2 year old son who has no idea what I’m talking about. But I’m going to and is ready for that, Jose.


S15: He’s going to understand that completely. The right is very age appropriate.


S6: Yeah, it seems totally fine, right? Exactly. I find the book just so well executed and highly recommended.


S16: So my chapter is the most pubescent chatter I will ever do or have ever done.


S1: And I can’t justify. I believe in. I know I’m ready to see where this goes.


S8: So I don’t I can’t even now remember why. But I was with my kids and some other kids in sort of the pubescent, pubescent age children. And I stumbled across the wiktionary, the Wikipedia dictionary page about cannabis slang. If there is a better Wikipedia page to read out loud to children, I have not found it. So I just want to recommend that you go to the cannabis link page because there are so many terms for pot and there’s so often. So I’m just going to start at random. Here we go.


S3: Yo, African Broccoli and Higuain Rocket AK 47 Alligator Cigarettes. Amsterdam’s Finest A Rotha Ass Bandit Amnesia M.E. Barney B-C Bible Worksheets Beanbag BIS Bishop Blister Bloop Bob Bob Hope but body Bobby Brown Boner Soup Bongo Booboo Shit Boogity Brown Boon bread brown Buddha Brown Frown Bubble Kush Bud Bud Ski Burger King Cabbage Caracas Caribbean Cabbage Seeds Seth Cheatham Checker’s cheeba Cheech and Chong Chig Chest Cherry Chickadee Freddy Chicken Chocolate Kronic Chronicles of Narnia and so on and so on and so on. And it’s just and it’s just goes on and on and their pages for terms for pot pages, four terms for people who smoke, pot pages for people who deal pot. All these amazing it is.


S8: The richness and vitality of the English language is manifest so deeply in this and I was so pleased. It’s like the Eskimos have fifty seven terms for snow. We have 57000 terms for pot. And I’m like, God. God love. God love the pot smokers of the world who’ve come up with all of them.


S12: Bob Hope surprised me in there. Santic, understand that one?


S20: Let’s see. There was a note, though, on that. Throw you off.


S10: Yes. That was the one I really threw me off.


S20: I also really like that genre of Wikipedia pages to read your children. I didn’t know that that was at, you know, a ranking that I’m God. I now know which one is number one. Oh, you know, I now I remember how I found it.


S8: Actually, I’ll tell you one second. And now that you say that the Bob Hope, apparently you wanna know a reference from David Foster Wallace.


S3: OK. But the reason I came across it is that one of my kids had asked me, what’s the most popular Wikipedia page? And I was just started to look at what the most popular Wikipedia page was overall. And then one in the top. And then we were looking at the top 100 and some were in the top 100 was something about cannabis.


S8: And so I clicked on that. And then ultimately through kind of river of links, I ended up at the cannabis slime page. Anyway, we also collect great listener chatters from you all. You can tweet them to us at at Slate Gabfest. And we got to folks. Tricia and O.C.D. and Barb Zak at T No SCD@@ Zack Barb each tweeted to us about a really interesting advancement that seems have been made in hydrogen fuel creation, also in solar and solar.


S16: Harnessing the sun for useful industrial processes that Bill Gates has funded. A company is a very secretive energy startup which takes thousands of mirrors and points the mirrors at a single spot.


S3: And it’s like the classic sort of how you fry an ant thing that people did as kids. I guess a version of that as you point all these mirrors at one spot and it creates a huge amount of heat. It’s very it’s very James Bond, death ray, a kind of moment. And one of the problems with solar is it has never been able to generate enough heat to do certain industrial processes that are very energy intensive, including making, making, cement making, and we’re making concrete. Kemmerer, which once cement or concrete, one of them. And this for the first time they’ve done it. And it’s an amazing advancement. So there are a bunch of stories about the secret of energy startups solar breakthrough, which you should check out. That is our show for today. The Gab Fest is produced by Josslyn Frank. Our researchers, Brigitte Dunlap. Derek Clemans is helping me here in New York. Mara Lazar is helping Emily in New Orleans. Jose is being helped by herself. You should follow us on Twitter at Slate Gabfests and tweet Chatoor to us there. And you should join us for our annual conundrum show in Oakland. Go Slate dot com fleshlight for tickets to that December 18th show for Emily Bazelon and the always game.


S21: Josie Duffy writes, Who got up at all hours of the morning to help us? I’m David Plotz. Thanks for listening. We’ll talk to you next week.


S16: Hello. Slate plus, how are you? So I haven’t checked how many South Dakota listeners we have? Not sure. We probably we must have some good number because we’re way.


S17: North Dakota. David North Dakota. NARAS Dakota. Oh, really? I was so no at all about that. And now I’m wrong.


S3: That was a very. David Plotz if you just did there. Can we leave that in?


S17: I did. And then I was wrong. You’re right, though. And you when you interviewed like that, you’re right like ninety nine percent of the time, whereas I sounded so cocksure of myself.


S10: And then how likely was wrong? Okay, onward.


S16: So South Dakota was in the news this week, mostly ridiculed for a new public awareness campaign about meth. And the campaign consists of a series of posters, some which show that the outline of a state, some of which show very healthy looking South Dakotans next to a tagline, meth. We are on it. And South Dakota spent about a million well, they spent about five and a thousand dollars so far out of a budget of a million dollars at one point four million dollars on this meth campaign. And they were absolutely ridiculed for this campaign and mocked for being like, don’t they?


S8: Are they saying that everyone in South Dakota is on meth? Are they encouraging people to take meth? What is it? Why are they doing this? And we’re gonna talk about whether this is this is terrible or amazing public awareness campaign. I just to tip my hand. I think it’s amazing. I think they did a fantastic job. Good for them. It’s a it’s a it’s a much better awareness about what they’re trying to accomplish than than something. It’s someone said like if their campaign was don’t do meth, it’s bad for you. That would not have gotten anyone’s attention. No one would notice it. And instead they had this campaign that people are suddenly like aware of and talking about. And probably that a conversation about meth in South Dakota. That’s a much richer conversation than it was a week ago.


S6: Yeah. I gotta say, the fact that I know what the meth campaign is in South Dakota means to me it was pretty successful.


S11: It’s a it’s a bold move. And I still don’t really know what than being on it means like with the policy and practice decisions are actually going to be that are instituted in the state. But I actually not only now know what the campaign is, but really kind of looked into how bad the mouth problem is in South Dakota and have a lot more awareness about that, too. So I I have actually kind of in support of this outrageous slogan.


S17: Yeah. That’s what the governor said. Exactly. She was like, hey, you all are tweeting about us. You’re talking about us. It worked. That’s what advertising is supposed to do. I am hung up on whether they were deliberately confusing about I’m on it or whether they knew from the beginning like that was or they thought from meeting that was the feature, not a bug.


S16: Also, what do you guys think? What are the different layers of meaning? So one is we’re on it or I’m on. It means I’m literally on meth or South Dakota is literally on meth. And the other presumably, presumably is were we’re on top of it. We’re like tackling it. Are there other layers of meaning I’m missing?


S9: I thought that was it. I think that’s it.


S10: Unless it’s like your Wikipedia page and there are all these other ways of talking about it that way that I’m not clear on which the Bob Hope entry. Right. That question.


S20: Right. But I will say I do think the most ridiculous kind of example of the ad is the one with the people. Right. We are on it with all these people who seem you don’t seem to be on meth, you know, which seems much more of an endorsement of like, look, you can look like this and be on meth and still have it together. But I think that that’s sort of the only the only the only double entendre here is the whether the states on fixing it or the state’s residents are actually on the drug, the meth campaigns of yore.


S16: But in the pre opiate era, when most of the anti-drug ads, there was a period of about five years on. Most of the anti-drug ads were really about meth before opiates became the scourge that they’ve become. We’re always like sort of toothless meth head. You know, somebody who is you see that they were 33 years old and they looked like they were 70. And, you know, their skin was drawn and lined and they looked like like they had you know, they they’d just spent unimaginable years being tortured somewhere. And that was those were the campaigns it was making. It was to show you horrors, to show you zombie horrors of meth. I found those pretty effective, but maybe they’ve decided like that’s that’s one only one way to do it. And that actually this is this is gonna be better. I don’t know.


S12: What I like about this alternative is the idea that lots of people from all walks of life are paying attention to this crisis because it’s affecting them and their families and people. They love that kind of mainstreaming of any sort of social problem. As an image, I think is really useful.


S11: Obviously, right now, when we talk about serious drugs, we talk a lot about opiates and opioids. The math problem is expanding fairly rapidly. It’s getting worse kind of nationwide and it’s changed pretty dramatically because years ago we thought policymakers thought they had solved it by regulating how much Sudafed you could buy at the pharmacy, etc. And instead kind of transferred and changed the way that meth came into the country, that people were obtaining it, making it and using it and have created essentially a bigger problem than what it was before.


S6: And so I think even the fact we’re talking about meth and especially meth in rural states is a major. It is really important just because we know that it actually is a epidemic that gets a lot less attention than it used to.


S18: Goodbye, Slate. Plus, we’ll talk to you next week.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership. The following podcast contains explicit language.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for September 12th 2019.


S3: The last mustache in Washington additions I am David Plotz That was scary a mild chuckle was from John Dickerson of CBS 60 Minutes. Hello John and New Yorker. Take it.


S4: Hi. Yeah. Then I’ve got a mustache related question. After we do the introductions.


S5: Great love mustache questions. Emily Barr’s one of the New York Times Magazine and Yale University Law School joins us from Houston Texas where she is two. She is there and she’s going to see the Democratic presidential debate tonight. Hello Emily.


S6: Yeah I think I got a press pass. If all goes well you know me I could show up and knock it in for some reason but that is the idea now.


S7: Emily are you gonna be in the hall or are you going to be in the filing center.


S6: I if I get there in time to pick up my press credential I think I can be in the filing center. Is that where I should be. I got this e-mail that I didn’t underwhelmed.


S8: Should is an interesting question that context because I mean if you’re in the hall you see what’s in the hall and that’s what only like two hundred other people see. If you’re in the filing center you experience it more like America except you experience that like America only if America was sitting in a bubble of campaign reporters.


S9: Well I went down the hall the filing center will just stress me out.


S4: Yeah. Now if you’re in the hall you’ll miss that moment that everybody goes oh my god you’re when you know X happened in this cutaway which you won’t see because it’ll be like an actual theater performance. But that’s not without it some it’s fun too because you’ll get to see all the stuff that happens behind the scenes like all the candidates making that strange justifications they make to try to get the moderator to call on them next oh I want to see that.


S6: OK. Thank you I’m so glad we had this conversation. Boring the entire planet.


S10: Or we can cut into all of our hundreds of thousands of listeners today in debate watching tips from John Dickerson It was going to be our special side podcast on today’s episode in a presidency characterized by bizarre governance.


S5: This is one of the weird weird weeks we have a president canceling secret negotiations by tweet and despoiling the weather forecasts by Sharpie. We will talk about that then. John Bolton is leaving as national security adviser. Is America safer because of that. Then we’ll talk about great new book from Paul Tough. The years that matter most a book about the college admissions process. Paul will join us for a very fascinating discussion about privilege and and educational inequality and college admissions. Plus we’ll have cocktail chatter and an important note. It’s Thursday morning we’re taping it is before the Democratic presidential debate in Houston which is Thursday night. But if you’re a Slate Plus subscriber a Slate Plus member you will get a bonus podcast from us tonight. We’re going to aim to do a podcast after the debate. That will be in your feed if you’re a Slate Plus member so it’s a great reason to join Slate Plus us to get this bonus podcast tonight where we will talk about the debate that is going to be tonight and one other reminder which is next week. We’re going to live in St. Paul Minnesota at the Fitzgerald Theater. There are a few tickets left. We’re going to have a special guest. Curtis Sittenfeld to talk about writing novels about politics writing fiction about politics writing fiction about real life politicians. She is just a delightful person and delightful guest that will be great. And we’ll also of course talk about the politics news of the day. So go to Slate dot com flashlight get tickets for our show on Wednesday September 18th at the Fitzgerald Theater in St. Paul. The president appeared to unravel a year of negotiations by his secretary of state this week with a tweet. He announced that he had canceled this upcoming secret talks with the Taliban at Camp David. These talks were aimed at finalizing an agreement to withdraw all U.S. forces from Afghanistan after 18 years which would fulfill a Trump campaign promise. And at that point the Taliban would be allowed to participate in Afghan governance without our interference and we would just say goodbye Goodbye Afghanistan. Sorry it’s been a good run for you later. So John why did he cancel these talks and why.


S11: Why was it so galling to many Americans when they learned that these secret talks were about to happen during the week of 9/11.


S12: Well I know you’re being facetious but but obviously it hasn’t been going well over the last 18 years and so that’s if America were to exit it would be not because you know they were saying hey it’s been real now we’ve got to go it would be because after 18 years the country is run out of patience energy.


S4: The president wants to be out. When you read one of the things that was striking about reading about Afghanistan in a more focused way recently is that when you read about the daily attacks when you hear the two dozen provinces are under you know daily skirmishes. When you hear about U.S. actions or coalition actions killing you know dozens of civilians it feels like we’re back in 2002. I mean it reads like nothing has really changed. Now of course there’ve been elections and there’s an incumbent government and there is kind of albeit barely functioning campaign that’s going on so that’s obviously different than before. But it’s been a mess. Now why did he. Well the reason the president stated was because the Taliban staged an attack that killed an American soldier. And that was the reason the president scuttled the talks of course the question that then immediately raises is what about all the previous attacks that were taking place during the 10 months of negotiation. Not many people took the president seriously when he used that as the pretext for canceling the talks. What then was the real reason for canceling the talks. It could have been internal opposition reportedly John Bolton and the vice president were against it. Finally to your question why do people find it so galling it seemed to be by the shape of the deal as it was leaked. It was a terrific deal for the Taliban which meant that the organization that initiated or didn’t initiate but allowed Osama bin Laden to living Afghanistan in order to plan the 9/11 attacks on the 18th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks were being invited to arguably the most plum place you can be invited to next to the White House or I should say after the White House and the shape of the deal looked like it was gonna be terrific for the Taliban and not good either for the long term interests the United States or the long term interests for the people of Afghanistan because it seemed sort of set the preconditions for the Taliban coming back into basically into control of Afghanistan.


S9: I mean to put a point on it it seemed like he was inviting people who we had held in Guantanamo as terrorists to sit down at a table at Camp David and accept our terms of surrender and then they were going to go home like they had to recognize the Afghan government but then they would like take over the country so it wouldn’t.


S6: They will. OK. All right. Anyway Hold on.


S4: That was an excellent synopsis coming after my rather long winded peroration Weldon Emily.


S13: OK. All right.


S5: But I I look I think they’re two separate issues. I think there’s the the how bad a deal was this is it. Is it in fact a total capitulation where we’re giving the Taliban everything that they want. And you know it is a abject tail between our legs departure for Afghanistan which it it sounds like it pretty much is. On the other hand I wouldn’t make a case that it is not at all clear that there’s that there’s any. It’s clear we cannot win militarily and it’s not clear what we’re gaining from remaining there. And so an abject capitulation may maybe the best outcome. That’s the first point I’m happy to dig. The best outcome for for the United States. That’s the interest that I care about. It’s the interests of the United States. I think that the people of Afghanistan have suffered enormously and they’ve suffered enormously partially at our hands partially at the hands of of other outsiders and partially at their own hands.


S11: But I am not sure that the United States at this point in our history has any capacity to particularly improve the situation there or win whatever that would mean. And therefore Jim just because we have committed a sin we’ve done a wrong and people have died. It doesn’t mean that we are then obliged to remain there to try to correct the thing when it’s clear after 18 years that we don’t know how to do it and we don’t have a capacity to do it. And therefore we are of you cannot do good. Don’t do anything.


S14: But I feel like I would hear their work in that situation. What is your.


S15: Because I mean if you’re imagining a peaceful unified Afghanistan then I totally agree with you. We seem incapable of bringing that about for all the reasons that have bedeviled every single invader and occupier of Afghanistan. I think though that we’re kind of holding helping the Afghans the Afghanis to hold the Taliban at bay. I mean the current situation is they control 46 percent of the territory where a third of the people live I think. And that’s not the same as everywhere. I mean for the other two thirds of the people not having the Taliban be the government is important. And then there’s this question of you know a breeding ground for terrorists. And the deal was supposed to elicit promises from the Taliban that they were not supposed to invite the terrorists to come stay. But I don’t see what possible leverage we would have to actually make them enforce that over time.


S16: I would just jump off on your remark David where you can’t do good.


S17: Don’t do anything. An excellent line.


S8: But I think in this case the president’s decision to pull out did three acts of harm one the signal it sent to the civilians that they don’t really matter that it’s only when an American soldier gets killed. Now why does that matter. The change that took place when U.S. the U.S. forces weren’t doing very well in Iraq was that you had to do a better job to use a Vietnam phrase of cultivating the hearts and minds of creating a connection between the Americans and the local population to turn against. In that case al-Qaeda to the extent that the U.S. is still gonna have interests in Afghanistan it would rather be have the regular people of Afghanistan be aligned with the United States. This weakened to that possible relationship. The second thing is that it inspired the Taliban that they they have even more leverage. They’ve been using lots of leverage to get the good negotiating terms that they’d already won by basically blowing things up because they knew that they had a president who wants to get out of Afghanistan almost come what may. And then finally it totally weakens an existing government that was already pretty weakened having been shut out of the negotiating already. So this wasn’t.


S12: And I know David you were talking about just about the negotiations say the 10 months so far but the the precipitous way in which they were scuttled I think has had those three negative outcomes.


S11: I am perfectly willing to believe this makes the situation of the Afghan government weaker it makes the situation civilians in Afghanistan worse I just am not.


S5: I think it is so the tendency in the United States and particularly because we have such a big military and the military wants to be used. Do you have a fork. You want to eat with a fork that there is this notion that that you should use it.


S11: And because we’re already there we should continue to to do the things that we’re doing or continue to try to win hearts and minds at some point. This is a war that’s been going on four times longer than World War Two went on and longer than the Vietnam war went on and it is not even like Iraq it’s very hard for us to win hearts and minds it’s a very mountainous divided country it is not it doesn’t it doesn’t have a it doesn’t have a lot of cogency it has been at war for 40 years most of the people who live in Afghanistan have literally been at war their entire lives. And so I accept there’s probably some level of amelioration the United States can do in the United military can probably keep the Taliban help keep the Taliban out of certain areas but ultimately is the cost that this country bears are regaining enough from it. And I’ll read you a re preventing enough harm in Afghanistan for it to be worth it. And I I have never not heard anyone make took for me was a credible case that the billions and billions and billions of dollars that we spend and continue to spend justify this. But the opposite of managing the exit properly. I mean I’m not.


S18: The poor management of the exit is different than wanting to stay embedded in Afghanistan in perpetuity. I think it’s a bit of a false choice you can try to get out of Afghanistan in a better way than has been than than we saw in the last week. Right. And I’m not advocating for staying longer in Afghanistan to win hearts and minds what I said was You don’t. On the way out. Kick them in the shins because in fact more to the point because you’re leaving more to the point because you no longer going to have active maybe as many troops there or as much of an active interventionists you want to leave on the best terms possible with the citizenry to hopefully create a situation where the ground isn’t fertile for the immediate return of the Taliban.


S9: Right. I mean it seems like the tricks of the bungled Camp David idea was such a insult and so distracting and then all I would think a problem in America politically that that sort of obscured these medium to longer term issues. I mean it’s hard to argue for staying eternally in a country in which you’re right David. All those shortcomings absolutely apply. And yet one does want to see United States leave with some some dignity for itself if that’s possible or more importantly importantly some dignity for the people who are going to be stuck. And I just worry we leave these countries we’ve asked people to collaborate with us and trust us and then we leave them so vulnerable.


S13: Yeah it’s terrible. Can can we talk for a second about the politics of Camp David.


S11: So I think it’s I think one of you indicated that it was insulting somehow to use or that that certainly there was public criticism saying it’s insulting to use Camp David this place of its very distinguished place to host the Taliban especially during the week of 9/11 that it’s. That’s a that’s an extraordinary kind of blow to whether that was the criticism he died.


S19: Yes it wasn’t just our idea Camp David. No no if your idea. No no. Where Jimmy Carter famously got Menachem Begin and onwards adopt a sign that Israel Egypt Peace Accord. Right. I mean it’s most hallowed. I’m just good yeah.


S11: But there were a lot of things there and Clinton tried to get the Israeli-Palestinian accord done there and that’s where the post 9/11 the Bush administration planned the response 9/11 it’s been used it’s very important ways. I I I cannot work up to him much emotion about this. I think when you’re dealing with enemies that you’re negotiating with and you’re trying to get a deal done sometimes you do things which would give them honor which give them make them feel better about themselves that you can get something out of them.


S14: Now it may be that the deal they were offering was so terrible at it through to that degree.


S20: Like if it seemed super strategic and like yes let’s give you this bit of credibility because you know we think it’s really going to do good and win concessions from you fine. But it just seemed like he wanted the theater and the attention for himself yes definitely.


S17: Also you don’t layout. I mean I think the criticism is you don’t lay out the finest family heirloom China in return for such a bad deal.


S18: That that that the Camp David was a further demonstration of a chief executive who’s desperate to just get out of there. And the downside of that and the downside of making impulsive moves like this is that they have real consequences. And so the increased violence that’s happened in the wake of this scuttled meeting at Camp David the Taliban seeing what they’ve seen for the last 10 months which is that if they keep engaging in violence it will make the sitting president want to get out of there faster which means the terms of the U.S. exit will that be that much more shambolic which makes their move into return to power that much faster. And the reason I think this has additional resonance is that we’ve had a debate over the last 18 years and maybe it was a stupid debate. But but we should figure out what the standard is and then stick to it about whether you telegraph to the enemy whether you’re leaving or not. It used to be the case that Republicans claim that Democrats who wanted to leave Iraq or Afghanistan were by saying so out loud already handing over a huge bargaining chip in the negotiation and that they basically doomed themselves to failure. And I think there is no question that the president has telegraphed and perhaps by the way for four great reasons which is that this has been too much of an expenditure of to use that overused phrase Don’t say blood and treasure. Don’t say blood and treasure. Yes and I had to in these conversations you have to hold likely Shepparton. Yes. You know and nevertheless that’s that’s that’s clearly what he’s been signalling and has now signalled again.


S13: Do you think this deal is actually dead Emily or do you think it’s going to come back. Trump loves to do this. I’m walking away from the table thing. That’s his one move in negotiations.


S9: So I think it’s going to come back and I’m hoping that the Camp David theatre is dead but I think the deal is for sure going to come back as he promised this. He wants it done before 2020. I don’t think he can. I mean look you know you said we are willing to be somewhat cold hearted about the terms. I don’t think he cares at all.


S12: It also doesn’t do Americans care about the terms. I’m not sure do. I mean I wonder at this I don’t know do they care if the terms are you know particularly helpful for the Taliban or not. I’m. My guess is that after 18 years Americans are are anxious to be done with it.


S15: I guess people don’t want to be humiliated perhaps but now we’re in the realm of imagining public opinion where I’m sure there are actual polls we could look at.


S11: I think that’s the most amazing little bit in the negotiations that I thought with it the fact that they would get to rename the country. Yeah change it back.


S21: We might not agree that the empire the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan which is what it was called when the Taliban ruled it which is Sharia it was that actually I know it’s symbolic.


S9: I felt silly for caring about that but I found that shocking.


S18: I also and I don’t I don’t know how and whether we want to go down this road but I do wonder David about your argument about you know it was a it was a sin and the U.S. can’t keep paying for its sins. What struck me is what obligation the U.S. has. Having gone into Afghanistan having tried to turn it into a democratic country the 45000 Afghan servicemen and women who have been killed just since 2014 in furtherance of this experiment what obligation the U.S. owes and for how long it was an obligation. Those 45000 Dad were fighting in the service of an idea that the U.S. came in to deliver. So there’s some obligation there.


S21: I want to make two points to close up. One is just on the question of obligation I think where we have an obligation is those who have helped us those who have served with us who have assisted us and often in danger of their lives that we owe help to. And so if you’re somebody who was a translator if you’re someone who who put yourself in a position where you’re likely to be in trouble in the post U.S. post U.S. Afghanistan that we should try to help you resettle try to help you get to United States in some cases. So that is an obligation I think we owe. I don’t think that we can serve the greater mass of the Afghan people. The second thing I want to say is that one of the things that I find so weird about Trump the jingoism the militarism coupled with the obvious skepticism of warfighting.


S11: So he actually has not deployed the military in ways that I would’ve expected him to. We haven’t attacked Iran. We haven’t attacked North Korea. We haven’t attacked Russia we haven’t attacked China. We haven’t actually used the military in the way that previous presidents have. Trump doesn’t seem to like it. It’s one of the things that I like about him. But he has coupled that with an militarization of home. So we have militarized the border we have these ICE raids around the country. We have military parades on July 4th. It’s this way in which the expression of United States military force has gone from being external to being internal. And I do not like that that is a very like totalitarian regime kind of thing to happen. So it’s a very astonishing combination. So really interesting juxtaposition I hadn’t thought of it that way before.


S22: Can I also just add one kind of crazy thing.


S12: Again 18 years after when Lou Dobbs on the 4th of July made fun on Twitter of of of some generals who in a Washington Post story said they were a little under a little and thought it was a little strange the president was calling for this military parade on the Fourth of July and also that there were some logistical challenges of driving tanks on the roads and all of that and said Lou Dobbs tweeted that no one did these snowflake generals haven’t won a war since 1991 two things struck me.


S22: One Has America really wrestled with and come to terms with and oh hey we’re in the middle of a presidential campaign. This might be a topic worth conversation. Do people really is it the view in America that America has lost two wars. And if so when we say Never Forget 9/11 what are we saying what are we like. The fact that this tweet could go out and like just be out there struck me that that no one thought this was that deep that Lou Dobbs was worthy of sanction. And he’s obviously quite close to the president in the president’s mindset but it’s that just accepted wisdom.


S12: And if so that seems like something that should require some comment from people who seek to lead the country anyway. So this idea of leaving Afghanistan under what terms and what that says about the U.S. exceptionalism all seems to me to be really interesting.


S23: Slate Plus members you get bonus segments on the gap that’s another Slate podcast today. You’re getting a lot. You’re going to get a bonus segment on this episode. We’re going to talk about how long books should be and movies how long movies should be. We’re not decide that for you. So go to Slate dot com flushed out s plus to become a member.


S14: Obviously there’s a right there’s a right. And we’ll figure it out.


S19: And there’s also you’re also podcast too. I think we should include 10 minutes and we’ve exceeded our leg.


S11: Dang it. There’s also the fact that you are likely going to get a bonus podcast about the debate tonight. We are going to do a Thursday special Thursday night debate podcast. After tonight’s debate and Slate Plus members alone we’ll get that go to slate that consulate gaffe has plus to become remember today and get all that good stuff John Bolton and his mustache are out.


S23: The national security adviser is gone after a year and a half. Emily did the mustache jump with the mustache pushed. What happened.


S15: Oh my God I don’t care about this. I for one second I feel like we’re all obsessing.


S24: Who cares. Like what’s interesting is what this has to say about foreign policy and the Trump administration. I don’t give a shit. Excuse me whether John Bolton resigned or was fired. He obviously was clashing with Trump couldn’t stay longer or at least this seemed a good day.


S9: I mean there is something odd about the fact that he’d seem to have sort of won the Afghanistan battle internally against the deal and then was shoved out the door.


S25: But I guess you know what we’re seeing here is one more person who had an interest in standing up to the president and offering an alternative sometimes diametrically opposed point of view getting shown the door. Mike Pompeo does not seem to be that kind of secretary of state. He doesn’t want to be. He sees himself as facilitating the president.


S24: He said the president deserves to have people around him who you know are promoting his point of view and helping him do what he wants to do.


S25: So you know it’s been a chaotic administration. Maybe it’s better if everybody is marching on the same page especially given how hawkish John Bolton was. I mean David for someone like you who’s really worried about intervention he was not a particularly good person to have around. On the other hand the idea of just the guests people around Trump all the time seems disquieting.


S18: The one thing that bridges the two topics is the president when asked about Afghanistan and the Camp David kerfuffle he said in terms of advisers I took my own advice. It was my idea and my idea to terminate it. Obviously we want presidents to make decisive decisions that’s what the job is you make decisions but you make decisions based on hopefully a system that tees up for you the best possible alternatives and then you make the tough call the gap in the current administration is that is that is that pre work doesn’t take place or if it does take place it’s totally ignored and the downside of that is the downside we’ve seen now as a result of this impulsive decision. I mean impulsivity is not a strategy and impulsivity is not leadership or decision making. The decisions are tough enough. Why make them harder. And that is a sort of systemic challenge that this administration has and that has real consequences.


S12: And they’re wrestling with them now and Zalmay Khalilzad who’s been working for 10 months to get the deal is now trying to scrape up in the aftermath of this impulsive Camp David imbroglio. There are a lot of people who are who are happy to see chaos in the Trump administration. And it’s not clear that John Bolton was the was the was a Brent Scowcroft you know a perfect person providing decisions for the president. But I think that whether he was resigned or fired matters only in this small way which is that the president said he fired him and then 12 minutes later while he was still on White House grounds John Bolton tweeted that he offered to resign.


S18: This is just another sign of such a disordered presidency. And this disorder has real consequences now that we’ve seen. Bolton is the third national security adviser. There’ve been three chiefs of staff. There’ve been a couple of secretaries of defense and a couple of acting secretary of defense same is true at Homeland Security. You can’t run a railroad this way. It has. I mean it just it can’t be. And for someone who was hired as a businessman it’s just that was the argument used for him. You know no CEO would would be able to last this long with with such a mess of a staffing situation that’s all true.


S21: That’s definitely true. I think on the substance I for one did not cheer John Bolton being there. So I will I certainly am not going to mourn his departure and I don’t really care about the manner of his departure his hawkishness super dangerous his world view is super dangerous and it didn’t doesn’t seem to comport with Trump’s own general instincts which as we were talking about are not particularly hawkish so the fact that Bolton is gone is not something that I am going to lose sleep over and nor nor is the fact that he was gone in some astray chaotic process particular something I may lose sleep over because we know that Trump. That’s how Trump operates. And so it didn’t reveal to us anything new and I don’t think it made this White House less effective or less orderly the White House is already totally disordered. So the fact that Bolton was the national security adviser which is a position that we normally invest with like enormous. It’s you know Scowcroft it’s Kissinger it’s Brzezinski like that that’s a powerful position is not really that. Relevant because Trump just doesn’t operate in a way where that position is powerful.


S4: But isn’t that it doesn’t that accept a certain amount of resignation on your part. I mean yeah.


S10: If there’s a horse in the hospital there’s still listen. I was going.


S7: How did you get that I mean you’re you’re saying because you I mean it still should be of concern if you buy this idea that there’s a horse in the hospital you shouldn’t say well the stable master really didn’t have too much to do with the horse in the hospital so the fact that the the stable master is gone and traditionally would have kept the horse out of the hospital means we shouldn’t care about a horse in the hospital this throws new light on a disordered process and there are ongoing issues with North Korea Afghanistan China that that even with the most ordered thinking would be would bedevil any president.


S4: It feels like a bit of a resignation in the in in that kind of analysis which is you’re setting the standard back to the chaos standard. And I think that’s probably.


S9: I mean I feel like we have so much evidence of chaos that it’s hard to imagine it being any different. Sure that’s one like this is the way Trump is going to be as president and if you don’t like it then you shouldn’t vote to re-elect him. But the idea that it’s going to change seems futile.


S19: Right.


S7: Yeah but nobody’s saying it’s the second one but nobody is saying that it’s going to change. But you should still note that this is that this is not the way it’s supposed to go and not the way it’s supposed to happen. And this far into an administration it should still be extraordinary that this is an extraordinary situation. And by the way we’re talking about the funny Henry let the fundamental job of the president which is to keep the country safe.


S26: Yeah but I think the second thing is it’s hard.


S25: So we hear about all this staffing disruption and then what is the immediate fallout. I mean the fallout is going to be down the line if something terrible happens and then it’s clear that the administration can’t handle it and that all of these jerky transitions have not just been like a long running television show or you kick characters off when you don’t like how they’re doing their roles but there were these bigger implications.


S20: I feel like short of that it’s hard to see what the immediate fallout is. I mean it’s hard for me and I am watching this kind of closely. So it’s like it seems wrong right. Sure. No company would run this way. It’s totally distorted and crazy and yet you know Rex Tillerson and Mattis who are supposed to be the grown ups in the room they left and we’re not at war because it turns out Donald Trump doesn’t like wars and that’s overriding instinct seems to be what’s actually pulling us through.


S12: Well I think there is short term and long term challenges the short term ones we’ve seen with Afghanistan. I mean the U.S. negotiating position is weaker. Violence is up. The underlying government that the U.S. would be handing it off to is in a worse position and the citizenry there is in trouble. And that’s as a result of a disorder process that presumably if you had a national security adviser in there or some system to keep impulsivity from driving outcomes then those those bad effects wouldn’t be taking place. So I think that’s one short term result. I think that the long term result is we don’t know what the downsides are of weakening alliances. I mean you know has basically resigned because of the of the president’s disinterest in maintaining alliances and you don’t know what that alliances matter until you need them. But if you haven’t been tending your alliances they don’t you can’t access them as well at the moment you need them. So those kinds of things totally agree.


S25: But don’t you think that when all of those chickens come home to roost Trump may not be president anymore. It’s gonna be hard to draw a straight line like it’s all kind of muddied. Partisans will come in and say oh no that whole probably you know the chaos of the Trump administration has nothing to do with why we’re in the pickle that there’s always a way of deflecting responsibility and when you talk about costs to people in Afghanistan I mean we just spent a long time coming to the conclusion that Americans don’t unfortunately care all that much about what happens to people in Afghanistan. I feel like it’s going to take some immediate urgent threat where there’s a clear cause and effect for people to really understand. I mean maybe I’m wrong and the electorate is picking up enough on this that it will matter in the polls.


S12: Well it depends whether you’re short of that it depends whether you’re measuring the events by the standard of how they should operate or the state or the political standard.


S7: So the political standards always bouncing around and always malleable and perhaps is more malleable now than it’s ever been because people who held the whole very sturdy worldview about the proper way of behaving personally privately domestically and internationally have all changed the rules of the game. And so but but in such an instance you can make the case that standards are even abstract standards separate and apart from the whims of the electorate because we know how changeable and malleable those are in even our own thinking if we even if we pretend that we’re these reasoning beings we all know how we all have confirmation bias season. So in that kind of unfixable world standards are even more important because they’re the things you return to in the midst of chaos. And so in these kinds of instances the political standard and how people may react and all that is all totally up for grabs and just the way you articulate it but it seems to me in analysis we and others have to say we have to remember the long term consequences and now by the way the long term consequences are often used as of as a kind of of a fuller you know you raise the danger of the long term consequence to get whatever you want in the short term. So I’m not saying that simply talking in the long term is the font of all wisdom ingenious but we do know it’s true that we can’t only think in the short term and so in these instances it seems to me that the pressure is to think in the long term more than ever because we’re in such a transactional short term world and the current occupant of the office like those before him. But this one in particular benefits from that short term and is termism because he can create a new reality with each new tweet storm. I totally agree.


S27: Also excellent segway into Alabama sharpies and pressuring scientists at the National Weather Service to back up some cockamamie theory because Trump happens to blurt it out. I mean you know the medium to long term consequences of that is to erode confidence in our federal government’s ability to produce good science to demoralize all the employees who work at these organizations and to bully the their supervisors. I mean I don’t know.


S25: I on John Bolton’s departure bothered me less than all of this week. Maybe that’s my own like flub but I just found that to be absolutely horrifying. Whereas John Bolton seemed like a problem to begin with I agree with you Emily.


S21: I think that that when I think about the what the long term consequences of the Trump administration are that’s more what I focus on. I think there is some danger that they will drag us into war that we shouldn’t fight or poison a relationship with Europe or with China or wherever that we shouldn’t poison. But the bigger risk is that we will destroy the foundations of government trust in government trust in institutions that are actually really important and that we all really need.


S12: I think they’re all of a piece. I think that’s all. I think it’s all and which is why Emily made that Segway.


S18: But it seems to me also you start the cost of being in these jobs starts to be higher and higher. It used to be protections for people various you know in various parts of the bureaucracy.


S12: Now that protection seems to be disappearing which means you just why would anybody go work in a government that’s that operates like this. Which means you end up having people who fill those jobs who have a kind of more political cast or are willing to or willing to do so. Sorry put up with politics. And that probably isn’t a great recruitment tool right.


S15: I mean one way to think about this is all of it is a big question about whether we’re going to snap back to the previous norms or some better norm after Trump is no longer president.


S9: And that will be a question on our foreign relations front. And it will be a question domestically and whether other countries will have the forbearance to kind of say like OK America let’s take another look at you.


S27: We used to know you. Now we’re totally puzzled and worried about you.


S9: But maybe I’ll change again. They sort of don’t have a choice because we’re such a giant on the international scene. That’s not to say there won’t be costs. I think with both China and Russia not and maybe other countries there will be but that’s sort of a fact. Whereas like these internal questions of eroding the strength of the democracy from within that and maybe it’s just that I focus more on those things and that’s the only reason it troubles me more. But if that feels like something I can imagine us not snapping back from.


S5: So we are pleased to welcome to the gaffe as Paul Tough. Paul is a writer in Austin Texas. He’s the author of the book How Children Succeed and now he has a new book just out the years that matter most how college makes or breaks us.


S21: It’s a look at how college and college admissions is impacted by and affects the inequality that pervades this country and how certain structures reinforce it. And it’s a pretty sobering book. Paul welcome to the campus. Thanks very much.


S28: I am so excited Paul is here because ever since I read this book over the summer I have been grabbing people by the lapels and asking them to talk about it with me I want to assign it to my entire university because I learned a lot reading it and also it made me think differently about access to college education. It made me feel guilty about teaching at a prestigious university but it also just made me really want to think through the issues you raise so I’m going to start by reading a few sentences from the beginning because I think that they capture the kind of heart of what the book’s about so I’m quoting you the American system of higher education has the potential to be a powerful engine of mobility able to reliably lift young people from poverty to the middle class and from the middle class to affluence. But in reality for many young Americans it functions as something closer to the opposite an obstacle to mobility an instrument that reinforces a rigid social hierarchy and prevents them from moving beyond the circumstances of their birth. So if that is sort of integral to the argument you’re making what is going on here and how much should this scramble are ideas about our individual children’s success and access to college education and really just how the whole system is constructed.


S29: I think it’s complicated. I mean I hope it does scramble things a little bit and certainly scramble it for me doing this reporting. I mean I think part of what’s complicated about it is that on an individual level higher education still is that engine of social mobility right. Like so I’d talk in the book to a bunch of young people who start with situations without a family. A lot of family resources and their lives change through college. But if you look at the system as a whole it’s not happening very often. And mostly we have a really stratified system where kids who grow up with a lot of we have one end up with one kind of education that leads them to one sort of future. And kids who grow up without a lot of education have all these obstacles to entering that part of higher education and are instead given far fewer options. So how we think about that in terms of our own lives where we work where our kids go to school gets complicated because I think that we’ve been sort of trained to think about higher education as this competitive marketplace right where you just get where you can for yourself and your kids. But it is also this thing that is determining how the class structure in the United States functions.


S5: I mean pulled in in the book you cite these incredible shocking numbers about how few poor people actually end up at elite schools that the elite schools when you when they get a child who’s been raised in poverty or raised in relative poverty that student often does incredibly well in their life later on.


S21: But there’s just a very very very tiny number that these elite schools are dominated by wealthier kids. Is this admissions offices are stupid. Is it that the universities don’t actually want to increase the number of poor kids that they’re letting in. Is it that they’re just not noticed. What’s going on. What’s happening. Why is that. Why is it why are they so bad at diversity of income.


S29: I think there are at least two different stories going on I think that’s part of what makes it complicated is that there are these two different stories in it. And part of this one story is those institutions which is a pretty small number that really have enough money to do whatever they want. So that’s maybe like the dozen most richest most well endowed institutions. You know you’re Harvard you’re Yale’s you’re Stanford’s and they are really super super super rich. They have a ton of money and they truly could admit anybody they want and tuition is a tiny part of their revenue each year. And so with them I feel like it like the reason that they are admitting so few low income people is hard to hard to figure out. You know I mean I think it is I think they have a lot of seats that they want to fill with particular wealthy kids. You know with legacy admits with certain types of athletes with certain types of academic superstars. But I think there’s also something in those offices where it isn’t the real priority for them. There’s something in the culture that makes it feel like that would not really be Princeton or Stanford or Harvard if they were admitting you know half of their class from the bottom half of the income distribution. So that’s one problem. But then there is this whole much bigger problem that I didn’t understand until I started hanging out with admissions people which is that most you know highly selective institutions do not have a lot of money about a quarter of private nonprofit institutions right now are running in the red.


S30: They’re losing money every year. So I spend a lot of time at this one college Trinity College in Hartford Connecticut which is in the red. And so there’s this and head of enrollment management head of admissions who is this like really noble and progressive guy who wants to admit more low income students and he is doing a decent job of admitting more of them but he can’t do more because he needs his institution needs tuition dollars. So for many institutions it’s simply a fact of. We need to admit kids who can pay the tuition.


S28: I also want to talk about the role of the College Board in all of this. I mean you have a pretty explosive chapter I thought about the College Board’s collection of data. There was this idea a couple of years ago from an economist named Carolyn Hoxby that if we just increase the information that students receive around the country that more high achieving low income kids would apply to prominent schools. That the problem was just like they didn’t know enough about how to do this. And if you just gave them was like six dollar solution right just a little more information was going to come in the mail and the College Board was supposed to be a huge part of this. In fact that has not translated into the kinds of gains in low income kids attending selective schools that everyone in this equation kind of promise. So what happened.


S29: There hasn’t been this sort of reckoning with why it didn’t work. And so it’s possible that there was just you know the original experiment wasn’t too great that they didn’t replicate it correctly. I think it has more to do with the fact that in reality the problem was not it wasn’t the fault of the kids. It wasn’t just that kids were applying to the wrong colleges or didn’t know what to do. It was that the system is just not designed to let those kids get into and be able to afford the kind of great universities they should be going to pull to the college board tried to create this adversity score which they ditched.


S18: Then in late August What was that an attempt to do and why did they ditch it.


S29: I mean so from the point of view of all the reporting that I’ve done over the last few years it was one more attempt in my opinion on the part of the College Board to find a way to keep you know the S.A.T. at the center of the admissions process and say we’re still helping poor kids do better so the idea was we’re going to not just give them one number the S.A.T. we’re gonna give them another number of how disadvantaged your neighborhood and your school is and again it sort of started from the premise that really these institutions do want to admit lots of poor kids they just are having trouble finding them or locating them or recognizing them. What my reporting suggests is that that’s not really a problem at all the problem is that these institutions aren’t admitting those kids because they don’t want them because their S.A.T. scores aren’t high enough or because they can’t afford to. Because those students can’t pay tuition.


S5: So Paul shouldn’t the solution to the over arching solution to this be a much stronger bigger investment in the large institutions of public higher education.


S31: But if we try to solve the problem through the institutions of private higher education they’re going to run these funding problems are always going to be favoring alumni. They have these athletic demands but that the big public universities and probably the community colleges can do a lot of this work and do it better but they’ve just been defunded at this extraordinary rate. And that that’s the that’s the that’s the place where we could have the largest impact.


S29: Yes. Certainly from a policy point of view I agree with you completely. I mean I think so there are these two problems and it’s again that’s the confusing thing about higher education there are all these different systems that are not entirely integrated. And right some private institutions like we don’t have a lot of public policy levers to make them change their their processes and yeah. And then like at places like Trinity there’s not much that public policy could change because they mostly just are trying to make their budget right. You know I still think it’s worth trying to influence through all the channels that the public has as you know as alumni as employees as students as parents. It’s a good idea to try to influence those highly selective institutions to do a better job and I think they could easily change their ways. But right even if that happens it’s still a tiny segment of the higher education landscape and it’s certainly a tiny section if you’re a low income student. And what’s happened at the same time is we have been defunding and underfunding public higher education. There’s you know a cut in the last decade or so of 16 percent in what we spend on higher education. Exactly at a moment where we should be spending more and more we’re clearly our young people especially young people who aren’t growing up rich need more credentials more higher education in order to compete in the economy. So that is the big issue and I think it’s important to separate those two things because they are very different.


S28: Can we maybe illustrate that by talking a little bit about this family. You clearly spent a lot of time who at the end Taylors fellow North Carolina. So you have this girl who’s interested in probably leaving Taylors veil and going to a school out of state or at least like out of her town you have her brother who’s tried to go to college and failed at that making the family very nervous about investing money. I felt like there were so many of the threads of the book kind of came together in this story because you know it on the one hand I wanted Kim to be able to go to college wherever she wanted and then on the other hand it made me test my own assumptions about which kind of school is really better for a particular kid.


S29: Yeah I felt I loved hanging out with that family and there’s a third brother or a who ends up in Community College studying welding so yeah they love spending time with them I got to see a lot of different aspects of how families interact with higher education. So what happened to this guy. He had a really rough time being not well educated kid and one of the things that he found as he went through all this was that actually what he had been told about the opportunities available in his part of the country anyway to welders were totally exaggerated like the welding jobs that he was able to get were making like you know 12 or 15 dollars an hour. So for me his story was about how this rhetoric about there being lots of opportunities for kids who don’t want to go to college is exaggerated.


S32: Paul is there any role for the outside philanthropies if public education is you know being chewed up by legislatures in various states and the private institutions have their motivations can.


S29: Is there any solution to this that comes from the billionaires we have sloshing around in their private jets not in the big picture because in the big picture the amount of money we spend on public higher education and we need to spend is just huge. I think beyond even our billionaires Ryan it should be public right. It shouldn’t be private it should be public. Yeah I was running whether they should give money to Trinity. I think absolutely. I think Trinity alumni should should be giving money to Trinity and they should say like yeah use this for financial aid. And so I do feel like alumni are in this situation whether they’re super wealthy or just you know have enough money to donate a bit to really influence what their institutions do. And you know most most of the time when alumni are giving money to their institutions it’s like yeah named Jim after me or you know being build some new high tech center. If you say like I want you to use this money to admit more kids who will really benefit from this education institutions pay a lot of attention to that.


S28: So we’re having in the 2020 race a lot of discussion of free college about different Democratic candidates. Is that part of the solution of amping up the funding of public institutions that you and David were just talking about and I mean do you think that that’s enough. Like do we have to do something that dismantles the private sector part of college education in a way that would be more threatening to a lot of the people who attend and participate in those schools and teach in those schools like me. Or is it enough to kind of make the public institutions like much more robust and excellent so that they’re providing the kind of access that we’re not getting from these private schools.


S29: I feel like private higher education like you know there are ways that the public policy can have an impact on that like you know all those 300 million dollar donations to Harvard were tax deductible. There’s lots that you could do to to change that equation and provide incentives for those institutions to do better but I really think they’re going to mostly respond to you know to alumni to employees to students right. And so so my hope is that we can those constituencies can push those institutions in that way. You know in terms of public education. I love the fact that this is coming up on the trail and in the campaign. And I think it’s really important. I feel like free college is not the right answer because really what the problem is is not is I mean tuition is an issue for sure in those public universities but mostly it’s the fact that those institutions don’t have enough money. It’s that we we the public have just not been spending enough on them. And that trickles down to students in a big way. I mean it floods down the students it affects them in a really immediate way. So what I think Democrats should do is say we are going to spend a lot more money on higher education not to make it free. I mean we can help help suddenly defray tuition for those who who can’t afford it. But you know if you’re if you’re a well-off kid going to the University of Texas you should be paying full tuition right like you should be you’re getting a good deal. And so you should be paying full tuition. But I think there’s a lot that we can do to make those institutions more equitable.


S21: Paul Tough is the author of the years that matter most how college makes or breaks us get it at a fine bookstore near you. Paul thanks for coming on and gabfest. Thanks guys. Let’s go to cocktail chatter. When you are contemplating the arrival of fall wishing for a brisk fall day wanting to see an orange leaf tumble off a magnificent oak what would you be chattering about.


S13: Emily.


S9: So the North Carolina State Government is just become a completely I don’t know.


S27: We use the word chaotic and not disordered so much in this show. I hate to return to them but it’s like a dystopia of where democracy could go next. What happened this week was that state House Republicans overrode the veto of Gov. Roy Cooper over their budget. They did this by it seems fooling Democrats into not showing up that day. Apparently Democrats were told nothing. No votes are happening you don’t need to be here it’s the morning of 9/11. And then with just sixty four of one hundred and twenty members in the House the Republicans voted fifty five to nine to override this budget veto it just.


S9: And of course then they could smugly say well it’s the Democrats fault they didn’t show up for work.


S27: You know legislatures have to have some kind of basic trust of process in some bipartisan manner in order to function. And the Republicans in North Carolina seem willing to just blow that up whenever it suits them. It’s kind of amazing to watch and of course because of the gerrymandering it’s hard to know what the consequences will be exactly though it is worth noting that the state is redrawing its state legislative map after last week’s court ruling saying that it had been gerrymandered so it’s interesting that in spite of that political future the Republicans still felt emboldened enough to do this.


S21: That was so shocking. Crazy. I sign a sign onto your chatter. John what is your chatter.


S33: Sign on to my chatter is mine on Shine on. Chatter is about a piece that ran in the times that I would have chatted about last week. But I wasn’t here by Andy Newman.


S32: It’s about a home health aide and it’s just a I should say it’s marjorie salmon whose is the name of the home health aide and it’s just a description of what her life is like caring for 78 the 77 year old man that she works for and it’s just an incredible window into a very deep hard demanding but also rewarding job and to human beings who spend the day together and the complexity of that day and the end and obviously the economic kind of insanity it feels of of Marjorie’s life given what she gets paid based on what she does and having been through versions of this and watched you know when my parents were at the ends of their lives you know the conditions that that home health aides have to deal with are basically you know they are where there’s not much depending on how you how you go out there’s not much left of you at the end of your life. And to be the guardian of that person at that stage of their life is a pretty solemn thing. Anyway this piece stirs up all of that and it’s just a great piece of reporting.


S27: I also thought it was great. And can I just say if there is one group of workers in this country who deserve a union it is home health aides and it’s also I think one of the fastest growing jobs. More and more people are doing this work and it though. Yeah all the things that you just mentioned could change potentially if they were able to bargain collectively.


S4: The piece is entitled on the job 24 hours a day 27 days a month.


S5: In the Times by Andy Newman my chador is completely self-serving chatter It is about Atlas Obscura because this week Atlas Obscura announced a huge new thing and I just want to tell you about it because I think it’ll be good for you and I hope you’ll join me with it. So we just signed on to a big partnership with Air B and B and B is invested in Atlas Obscura and Airbnb B announced Obscura now going to massively expand the number of trips and local events that we’re doing. So so Atlas Obscura is obviously a guide to the world’s hidden wonders but also we take people to see those wonders we’d both do it in local cities in the US and now we’re gonna be all over the world and we also offer trips to go to wonderful places to go explore the spam annex of the Balkans or or take a safari just look at the insects of Namibia or to go on a sailing voyage around the abandoned lighthouses and sunken ships of Sardinia and we’re gonna just do more and more of those and we do more and more of these local experiences in partnership with everybody. So I would just really encourage you to come down subscribe to go to Atlas Obscura slash trips and Atlas Obscura dot com slash trips excuse me and check it out. It’s going to be a great partnership it’s going to I hope give you a chance to explore parts of the world you haven’t been able to see to have great experiences in your own neighborhood that are unusual and wondrous and surprising. Please check it out and apologize for for my totally self-interested chatter this week in order to clear away that self-interest. Let’s talk about your chatter listener as you have sent us so many so many great chatters this week. Again there were literally like eight great chatters that were the ones I couldn’t even get to John there was one about the whale the whale roughly when I come back to that one but when I meant me to talk about that even it was so good. But you were tweeting your chatter too I said that’s like gaffe has are so many great ones I’m actually gonna quickly mentioned two because they were one is super timely and one is super shocking the actually both super shocking to one from at Mohan White Russia from Myanmar Russia points to a new York Times story the 9/11 tribute lights are endangering 160000 birds a year and is the story about how when they turn on the wonderful lights that on 9/11 they do they light up the place that was where the Twin Towers stood and these two pillars of light that stretched the horizon. Enormously bright lights it’s a really stunning beautiful moving thing but it has the effect of drawing birds that are migratory birds because they see these lights and they are drawn to it they can get disoriented and off track and thousands of them hundreds of more than a hundred thousand according to an estimate are at risk. That was a great story about the cost of that memorial and then I also want to point to a story from at our freight link from Bryan freight like Froelich which is that follow up on our opioid conversation. It’s about how there’s a Louisiana Congress member of Congress who’s also a candidate for governor a Republican who owns pharmacies that are dispensing opiate pills by the gazillion. He’s he’s a pharmacy owner his name is Ralph Abraham. I hadn’t heard of him but he’s a member of Congress Louisiana Republican and he’s he’s one of the people who’s who’s abetting this epidemic shocking story in Bayou brief. Check that out.


S3: That is our show for today. The gap that’s produced by Jonathan Frank. We had help from Melissa Kaplan Alan paying who is helping you Emily Laura eyes and c is helping me and I am very grateful and our researcher is of course Bridgette Dunlap. Thank you Brigitte Gabriel Roth is the editorial director of Slate podcast Joan Thomas is managing producer you should follow us on Twitter and at Slate gabfest and please if you’re going to be in the Twin Cities next week we’ll have our show on next Wednesday September 18th. We’re excited there are still a few tickets left. So go grab those tickets and join us there on September 18th at the Fitzgerald Theater. Go to Slate dot com last live to do that for Emily Bazelon and John Dickerson and David Plotz. We look forward to being all together next week and seeing some of you in the flesh. Bye bye.


S21: Hello Slate Plus how are you. Good to see you. Good to hear you can’t hear you or see you truthfully because we’re just broadcasting but I’m imagining what you look like. So I have had an interesting experience in the past week or so which is that I’ve started a novel called A Suitable Boy which is a maybe 15 or 20 year old novel by Vikram SAIT and it’s a fifteen hundred page novel. It is a just extraordinarily big and heavy book and it’s a it’s a telling of the lives of some intertwined families and in India just after Partition around 1950 and very cheerful romantic interesting lively book it’s delightful but it’s fifteen hundred pages long. Fifteen hundred pages. And I also this summer a book called Fall and Neal Stephenson book which is 900 pages long 900 pages long so that’s a lot of pages that I’ve been reading in single books. So I wanted us to have a discussion of how long books should be and how long. Also movies should be. So should books be this long or not and is their proper length for book or for movie. And I think my answer just to tip it off. I’m not going to give it away right now is that there is a proper length for movie but there’s not a proper link for a book. But I’m going to tell you exactly how long a movie should be. But you’re going to listen. Emily do you have any thoughts on this.


S9: Yeah I get intimidated by really long books. I have been meaning to read a suitable boy for ever and have not picked it up because it’s like a doorstop. And I feel this way about Infinite Jest which sits unread on my bookshelf.


S27: I barely made it through reading Marcel Proust.


S26: Finally finally a few years ago because in search of lost time just like there’s so endless these things it makes you feel like you’ll never.


S27: It’s hard to start it. It creates this huge barrier to entry.


S34: So what does that. How long should something be then it should be short or it should be broken into more manageable pieces.


S27: I mean I guess the thing is the end run around this is to have a series where you have a trilogy or a mini book set and so you can feel as if by reading one of them you’ve accomplished something and obviously if you love it it’s great because there’s more. I mean the that I find that to be usually more true of television shows which are less demanding than books but it can be totally true right. I mean some of my favorite books are series but I don’t know there’s just something about like the book that’s over 500 pages that makes me weary. John


S12: what do you think was so cozy in Search of Lost Time is broken in two more volumes say repentant Remembrance of Things Past.


S9: I know I think my copy had all of them and that was part of the problem was that it just was.


S22: I think you know Infinite Jest. Well yes.


S4: Listeners and devotees of the podcast will know I have a real complicated views about David Foster Wallace. As a fiction writer one of the things I asked I don’t know if I know this as a as a nonfiction writer because he is a fictional writer I’ve not yet made his fiction his non-fiction writing was full of fiction and that’s fun. If you tell everyone that’s what you’re doing but if you’re pretending it’s the real thing then it’s a problem.


S17: But I found Infinite Jest at times you know certain sentences and certain paragraphs I mean chests sparkling brilliant fantastic. And then just I got it got wearisome. I wonder if there’s something about Infinite Jest that here’s where it feels wearying that’s different than its actual length. But if you can carry it off you can have book can be as long as you want it to be as long as you know I’m carrying it off means not only does the story have to be compelling but you have to be okay with the narrator’s voice in your head for that long. I wonder if you’re writing such a book whether you stay with the same narrator can you you know can it be a trusted friend for that long a journey or do you hand it off to different narrators The Brothers Karamazov as I’m thinking about the different voices in that. Or does the whole topic kind of wear you down even if it’s even if it’s a different narrator every book it’s over say five or six hundred pages just lacked a good editor with like a Patton crossing things out.


S4: Right. Or they were writing in serial fashion getting paid by the word.


S15: Well that was true in the 19th century and that’s certainly true for Dickens for example though I don’t find Dickens to be too long. I mean his digressions are so entertaining and you can kind of read past them if you like.


S23: I basically think no book should be no novel should be more than 200 and 300 pages long.


S14: Wow.


S11: No that’s so sure and even though I love big social novels. I think people are allowed to write them. They’re permitted in the plots regime. You’ll be allowed to write those books but people will not have to read them at that length because every book that is longer than that will also get like we’ll get a Reader’s Digest condensed version.


S14: Oh my God. You a letter if you sound like my children.


S25: I think this is like the this is lost. The doom lies ahead.


S5: So my when I was a kid we sat we occasionally spent a weekend a vacation in a house in Maine and all I remember from this house in Maine was that it had the Reader’s Digest condensed books and those were maybe 150 page summaries condensed versions of great books and they were fantastic. And why shouldn’t there you.


S23: You write in this book you do you you do you but you have to as part of writing your 900 page book also fund the creation of 150 page summary condensed version which isn’t it’s not it’s not a privacy. It’s not it’s not a cliff notes it takes you know it’s it’s a severe edit I that’s what the solution to the plane of novels is very immersive.


S20: Now I’m going to argue for everything to be like over 500 pages even though I don’t think that that’s correct either that’s truly like 250 300 pages is not long enough for many novels the way they’re written and the way they should be written. You want only one hundred and fifty or two hundred pages of like Dickens and Jane Austen and George Eliot et cetera et cetera what I’m.


S5: Jane Jane Austen definitely her books are clock.


S6: Jane Austen was a bad example. I do not want Middlemarch to be cut down I’m not saying it has to be cut down.


S23: I’m saying you can go ahead and write it. But also march. I will. I want there’d be to be a published little march as well short. There can be long march Middlemarch and short march and that’s what I think.


S11: Now I’m just going to move on before before your head blows off and just talk about movies because I think there’s a stronger case here which is I saw Apollo 11 which was 45 minutes long and apparently the IMAX version is 45 minutes long. But there was a 90 minute version elsewhere and I and people were like Oh you should’ve seen the long 90 minute version. I was like I was totally satisfied in 45 minutes.


S9: Why should I see a 90 minute version especially like that. This probably doesn’t even apply. It’s just like right level stuff right.


S23: The correct answer in movies is that all movies should be ninety five minutes long except the movies which are three hours and 30 minutes long. So you can make a three hour and 30 minute movie or you can make a ninety five minute movie. What you are not allowed to do is make a movie that is two hours and 20 minutes long a two hour and 20 minute long movie is a murder.


S14: That is an act of violence against you because it is three hours and third five million movie three hours and thirty one is like the Super three. That like somehow justifies it.


S11: No the three the three and a half hour it’s Lawrence of Arabia. It’s gone with the wind it’s the Godfather and you’re like OK I’m really putting in. That’s it gonna be a whole day I’m willing to put in a whole day for this.


S25: And gone with the wind or terrible movies.


S23: It is really shocking. I can’t believe that we watched that as kids. But wait let me just finish the thought. So three three and a half hours is fine because you committed ninety five minutes it’s great because then you’re in and out in two hours that’s perfect. Those movies they’re two and a half hours long and I’m looking at you all you marvel movies. It’s just so painful because you end up a two and half hour long movie or two and 20 minute movie. It’s a three hour experience which is too long to do practically anything and and every 2 hour and 20 minute movie you see oh here’s where 10 minutes could be cut off here’s where another 20 minutes could be cut off. Every one of those movies. Whereas ninety five minutes is just perfect it’s you should you’re like so happy you’ve been there and you’re like oh good I can now do something else. I can go have dinner. To see you two hour 20 minute movie you can even have dinner that night.


S25: I totally agree with this. And the fact that now I watch almost every movie or TV show at home makes me acutely aware of it. I mean you can stop it in the middle if it’s too long. So but I’m now I really want things to be like 50 minutes or 27 minutes.


S4: Yeah. Nothing. Marvel has ever done is wrong. Oh no. Or do one of them. So you know people and I mean there’s the thing would the.


S16: So the Lord of the Rings movies are three different movies. Well so they obviously couldn’t have been one. I found all those to be the right length but those are in the three hour category. And I have a special problem. Oh yeah.


S14: The Star Wars movie star lists and nothing to have an answer. Stuff that wasn’t even in the book. I found that super Yeah.


S16: Now the Hobbit movies are not I don’t include those in the wonderfulness of the Lord of the Rings is really. Yeah.


S5: I’m going to. John the Star Wars the new Star Wars movie The running two hours 10 to 20. And I just think that that’s that shouldn’t be a.


S14: I have been making a mistake in Star Wars Land. I don’t even know what the characters are anymore.


S17: Here’s something that I want to know which is Is there a perfect way or time to read a book. I think David weren’t you arguing that you read books in the Morning now.


S11: I try to.


S4: Because if I read it I have I get four pages when I’m done with my body which will be the appropriate length and not a page longer or shorter leg and a book that you will not be able to put.


S19: That’s right. Exactly. People set aside everything they are doing. That will be the proper way to read it will.


S4: It will initiate an extraordinary weight loss regimen in America because people will be unable to get up from reading it to feed themselves and so they will they will lose weight as well as be informed but get better. And it can suffer from dehydration but it’ll be worth it for their country.


S17: But what I wonder is is whether what a book Marathon can be like. Like I so it’s I read the road in one sitting I read one of those girl with the dragon tattoos in one sitting. But I wonder if I could even do that anymore.


S4: And I look forward to trying to do that when I’m done with my with my book.


S19: And you’re a wonderful didn’t creaky. No wonder I think I should do more anyway. I wonder would because we’re the only people listening to you. Yeah. No one is.


S14: And that’s not already the case. Actually I’m interrupting. It doesn’t even count.


S11: Tune in next week to discover what book John will be able to read in one sitting. All right Slate Plus we’ll catch you later. Bye bye.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership.


S2: This episode of the Gabfest contains explicit language.


S3: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for November 7th 2019 the one year from this week edition.


S4: I am David Plotz of Atlas Obscura. Here in Washington D.C. Joining me visually but not physically is Emily Bazelon of the New York Times Magazine who I’m looking at over.


S1: Over skype Hello Emily. Hello. Yale. How are you. I’m good. Glad to be here. And then joining me not visually but telephonically is John Dickerson of CBS 60 Minutes from New York. Hello. John Dickerson Hello David.


S5: I am. Is it telephonically let us know. All right come on.


S6: Well look it’s interesting you said radio. It’s easier to telephone Oh my God can you tell me where I stand it’s not telephonic.


S7: Oh my God you’re being pedantic already on today’s gabfest election results in Kentucky and Virginia embolden Democrats. And then there are discouraging poll results in swing states for Democratic presidential candidates. Then impeachment barrels forward. What happened this week. What is about to happen and then President Trump withdraws the United States from the Paris climate accord. Is that catastrophic or merely terrible plus we will have cocktail chatter one year from this week we will have elected a new president or possibly the same president. And this week we saw the last major elections before 2020 and a bunch of states that weirdly have off year elections which are always cute but confusing because you’re like it’s an odd year. Why is there an election. But it’s still nice to have. And then we also saw some very interesting. And if you a Democrat alarming poll results for Democratic primary challenger. So let’s start with the 2019 results. John in the Commonwealth of Virginia the cradle of the Republic the cradle in fact of John Dickerson Democrats took control of the state Senate and the state house. Why is that important. Why is it overdue. Is it important and overdue.


S8: Well I think it’s it’s important well it’s for the first time in 50 years so that’s when anything anytime anything comes for the first time in 50 years. You should take note of it. Basically most people would say what this does is it ends the charade that Virginia is not a blue state. You know it went from being red to purple to blue and so they’re saying that it’s that it’s now a blue state and that I don’t know what I think about that debate. That’s fine you can have that debate the most interesting thing it seems to me about Virginia.


S6: The two most important results are first of all that the that Republicans did not win back the seats that they lost in 2017 when Democrats had strong showings in Republican areas and then Democrats won in additional areas to take control over the two state houses. You now have the two statehouses and the governorship all in the same party which means there’s going to be a series of series of legislation passed in Virginia on on gun control in particular that’ll be very interesting to watch. Why is that interesting. Because of the second thing. So the first point is Democrats are showing strength Republicans weakness in the excerpts the areas out suburbs and outside. And that’s something we’ll talk a lot about because it was also strong for Democrats in Kentucky and the argument is that if it’s been strong consistently in 2018 2019 that’s bad for Donald Trump. But the second thing that’s important in Virginia is it’s the home of the NRA the forces of gun control gun safety whatever you want to call it basically now have beaten the NRA in their own backyard. That will mean a lot for gun legislation in Virginia and for the for it for every town organization. It’s a model for inroads they might be able to make in other states.


S1: Emily quickly let’s also hit the I think probably the other big state for Democrats this week with Kentucky where a Democrat in a very red state beat the extremely hated incumbent Governor Matt Bevin in a state where President Trump campaign and try to tie the Democrat Andy Bashir to impeachment. Trump had won the state by 30 Republicans won every single other statewide office that was up. Is Bevin’s loss a warning for Trump or not really. Is it just like a particular set of circumstances with an extremely bad and hated incumbent.


S2: I think more of the latter. You know I wonder if people think differently about the governor in some circumstances than the sort of normal party polarized politics that we have. You know I’m thinking of the fact that a Democrat is governor in Kansas or Republican is governor in Massachusetts. There’s a way in which that administrative job can I think seems a little less political than some other positions. And I mostly just think that yes what you said there was an extremely unpopular incumbent. It’s true that President Trump couldn’t save him but he had been his own worst enemy.


S9: It’s a great question. But what I think will be interesting is if you match the suburban the next certain results in Kentucky with what happened in Virginia and then what happened in the same areas with the same kind of voters in 18 whether it’s demonstrably true that that will all play out the same way in 2020. It suggests enough data points that it puts high and heavy uncertainty in the air for Republican senators who are running in 2020 in places where they’re going to depend. I’m thinking of people like Cory Gardner Susan Collins running in states where they need those votes. And if Donald Trump and the Republican Party of Donald Trump has consistently been showing weaknesses in those areas again whether it actually plays out that way in 2020 I think it’s going to make some nervousness and change perhaps perhaps some calculations over the next year as Republicans worry about becoming a party that is just defined by the Trump coalition which is essentially non college whites evangelicals and and rural voters.


S6: And that nervousness again whether it’s true or not will create some some potential for some more destabilising action among Republicans possibly.


S1: I actually had a question about that John. It’s John Cornyn up for election yes. Yeah 2020. Yeah I mean that’s when I look at what John Cornyn is doing which is to not be as full throated around impeachment as you nearly would expect given that it is the number two Republican in the Senate. He’s a Texas Republican. I. That to me is a signal he is very worried that that he you know he could face something serious.


S6: Again these are these linkages we should all you know these are drawn in pencil and very lightly. But but I would also link it to what what I went on at some length about with Mitch McConnell the other a couple of weeks ago when he was asked about the conversation the president said he had with McConnell and McConnell basically threw the president under the bus.


S8: I think you can if you start to see a number of these things you see some again whether the distancing from the president is even possible. I think that’s quite hard to do for anybody but but just the more uncertainty and destabilisation there is in the world added to the existing highly destabilising behavior of the president and the people who are defending him it just adds more kind of frenetic possibilities in an already pretty frantic political world as everybody’s trying to gauge what the politics are going to look like on Election Day a year from now.


S9: That puts so much uncertainty in the system for Republicans to see this weakness repeated in these areas that used to be part of their coalition.


S2: And yet if you are Cory Gardner or Susan Collins or even John Cornyn aren’t you kind of caught in a vise like you can try to put some distance between you and the you know I would say most like crazy to defenders of Trump like Mark Meadows who just seemed to be saying I mean and Lindsey Graham like I am in lockstep with the president no matter what he says I’m going in that direction they’re stepping back from that. But in the end like there will presumably be an impeachment trial in the Senate and it’s very hard to imagine them currently voting to remove from office President Trump. Now I do think that could change. I mean we saw public approval of President Nixon drastically move downward during the public hearings in Watergate. But I just feel like from the vantage point of right now I’m not sure that this is like the either an angel or devil of being a Trump supporter or a Republican senator in the Trump era.


S6: You may be trying to maintain some kind of semblance of separation but how far is that really going to get you whether a candidate any candidate can separate themselves in a nationalized election and we have them even an off year.


S9: So of course you’re going to have on in 2020 is I think basically most people have been in the game say you can’t do it. You can’t get out from under a President. However candidates in fear of not being re-elected tend to do things you know they throw Hail Mary passes and you know Cory Gardner in Colorado which is a base basically a one third one third state. So Democrat independent Republicans split the state in thirds. John Hickenlooper he’s who he’s running against the former governor and mayor of Denver is a very popular fellow in the state. So Cory Gardner you could imagine again if you even if you stipulate that you that you can’t get out from under a president may still try. And why does that matter. Well that’s one guy in one state Well first of all Colorado is a battleground state. Second of all as we know from this president when a when one person does thing something that he doesn’t like he goes after them. So then it becomes you can imagine that growing into something more because then he’s attacking Republicans so what’s Mitch McConnell’s say about that and so on and so forth. So it’s it’s just as I say a possibility for destabilisation.


S1: I want to touch Emily on what is potentially the most alarming aspect of the vote on Tuesday which is as of Wednesday actually didn’t look this morning there were there was intimations hints even open statements from Republican legislators in Kentucky that they might not accept the results of that gubernatorial election. And there is a the one of the leaders in the Republican House is trying to confected this into a contested election which was you know about 5000 votes separating the Democrat and Republican. And this stunning kind of possibility that the how the Kentucky legislature which is dominated by Republicans might try to overturn the popular vote. I actually don’t think this will succeed for a couple of even if they make a real push it at which there’s no sign they’re going to one is Bevin has been a lousy governor even for Republicans he’s made them more unpopular he’s been unpopular himself. So why keep him in there. Second it is actually fun to have a Democratic governor of the rival party in some ways especially if you have a majority in the legislature. You can really mess with him and score points off of that person and that’s a kind of good way to spend a couple of years sometimes. So it’s not it’s not that bad to be in the out party if you have the majority in the legislature. But also I don’t think it’s effective to cheat in elections after the fact. I think it’s very effective to suppress the vote in a dance when it can be dressed up as some kind of principle of voter integrity. But after the fact when the vote’s already counted the numbers are there. It is not. I think it’s going to look a lot like cheating if they try to push this through.


S2: Yeah it would in fact be cheating and a deeply alarming if this happened. You know I will just note Kentucky already does one thing to suppress the vote which is to close the polls at 6:00 p.m. You know I think that you’re right this isn’t going to go anywhere. But the fact that it’s even being discussed it’s just these signs we’re getting from states. I mean we’ve gotten them also from Wisconsin and of course like the queen of this is North Carolina where if you don’t like the way the game is being played you just like throw the board up into the air and all the pieces fall in some other place you just change the rules. You know I don’t know enough about Kentucky law to know how the governor’s powers are distributed and who decides. But you could really imagine this legislature trying to clip the wings of this new Democrat coming in in much the way that the North Carolina Republican dominated legislature has has done that for Roy Cooper the governor there.


S10: Let us turn my friends to the polls for the presidential campaign from one kind of poll to another kind of poll there was a really interesting poll in The New York Times of swing states. John this week looking at how various Democratic presidential candidates might perform against President Trump in Wisconsin Pennsylvania Michigan North Carolina Florida and Arizona. Interesting that Arizona is a very legit swing state in a way that Ohio for example doesn’t seem to be anymore. Why were Democrats so agitated by the results of this poll and is it is this one poll significant.


S11: It’s let’s see how to pack. OK. So why were they agitated well they’re agitated because Biden’s only up by a couple of points over Trump in these six states. Let’s see Sanders was up a little bit and Warren was down. So I think there was agitation for two reasons one Biden up wasn’t up by as much as he has people thought Warren was down and three and this is the bigger point I think is a lot of people think stopped looking and thinking about the election in that way stop and take it basically boiling the entire election down to six states full of larger shares of white working class voters because that’s not what the electorate is about.


S9: And implicit in even doing the poll among some Democrats is the idea that that or they would argue that the Times poll kind of has its thumb on the scale in terms of this larger argument about whether the Democratic Party needs to quote unquote moderate to go for the kinds of voters in those six states or go for the kind of voters that might have even been part of the Trump coalition in those six states or whether the Democratic Party by being true to its principles and kind of more liberal vision can blow through turnout models change the shape of the electorate in those six states and other places with a kind of Warren or Sanders type candidate.


S2: I have a question about the idea of how significant this poll is a year out. Nate Cohn is the Times reporter who did the poll and talking about it said hey a year out is basically just as good as right before the election. And then Nate Silver the guru of 538 said polls a year out like not. Not that not that reality based not that important. What’s the answer here.


S1: First of all the answer is the polling gurus need to get different first names. It’s too confusing to have both Nate Cohn and Nate Silver be named Nate.


S12: I think it’s just a problem.


S1: One of them to actually well I feel like Nate Cohn Nate Cohn has has I don’t know Nate Cohn. I’ve met Nate Silver a couple of time Nate code it’s like definitely riding on the coattails of Nate Silver he’s like oh where’s that. What’s the hot polling name it’s Nate. I’m gonna I’m going to glom onto that.


S12: And the Times hired him and his parents would really shake. Are you sure. No I don’t think I know the answer to this. What am I supposed to make of these polls year out matter don’t matter.


S6: There’s a general principle. And then I don’t know I didn’t see what Nate Silver of 538 said. I did read in The Times the idea the statement that I had and I have a note here. Go check it out and see if that’s in fact true or if there’s like some important caveat. But yeah. The the article that went along with the polling said that on average in the last years three cycles head to head polls a year ahead of the election have been as close to the final result as those taken the day before the final result.


S2: I just interesting because like in a tweet you know what polls you’re out. But I’m not sure it will.


S9: First of all there aren’t polls taken the day before. I don’t think right because the days prior whatever. Right. Polls released the day before. Anyway the broader more important point is so much changes and happens you can’t. I mean you can say you can say that that’s been what the result in the past has been. But if there’s an instance in which past performance does not predict future results in this current political environment I think that would be wise. To keep in mind in that in that context. But I do think the idea that if the Electoral College is still in play in our presidential elections then it is important to look at the states that will that will matter with respect to the Electoral College. So I think looking at these six states makes sense and then we should probably turn to this idea of what’s the actual electric going to look like and then who is best set up to make the case with that elector.


S1: I thought what was the most interesting thing in Nate Cohn’s piece accompanying this story about his poll was noting what kind of people seem to be supporting Biden but not Warren or Warren but not Biden. Yeah and yeah. And that you have categories so for example there’s Sanders seems to pick up a bunch of young voters. When you poll who don’t want to then vote for Warren or Biden and Biden seems to pick up like a lot of people who don’t seem to want to vote for a woman.


S2: For example there seems to be a lot of just out and out cold stone sexism in the electorate which was horrified to read about it like 40 percent of the people but there’s 6 percent of the electorate is Biden not Warren and 40 percent of them was answering yes to questions that made them seem like sexist questions about the likability of Warren and female candidates in general.


S9: And I’ve said this before but this is basically votes in the Democratic primaries and caucuses are going to be about punditry about what your neighbor thinks. So you know Democrats are by wide majorities fine with having a woman president but they don’t think that their fellow Democrats are fine with having a woman president which means when they vote or they casting a vote for the person they think should have to do the job or they doing you know casting the vote for the person they think will have the best chance in the general action because of people’s predispositions about women. And that’s sort of what a mess that isn’t doing is trying to sort that out. Good luck with that.


S13: John what do you make of the fact that so this poll of swing states included these six states Wisconsin Pennsylvania Michigan North Carolina Florida Arizona it did not include Georgia Texas and Ohio which are in Iowa. So I think the presumption being that Ohio and Iowa are now basically Republican states and it’s going to be they’re not really swing states and that. But also there’s this last conversation that I hear among people that Georgia and Texas are potentially in play and Arizona is certainly in play.


S6: Yeah well I guess it means it’s making some bets on two things One is that basically the shape of the electorate in Iowa and Ohio is just Democrats are never going to do well enough to reach far enough into the white working class voters in those states or white rural voters in Iowa to beat. Also you’ve got you know you’ve got a Senate race in Iowa that will with an incumbent Republican that’ll tweak things for the for the Democrats.


S8: And so although by the way we should note. But just as a farm state here’s and we should talk about this. If you look inside the Republican coalition it seems to me Democrats would have some opportunities. Let’s talk about rural voters for a moment.


S11: Bankruptcies for farms are gonna be as high as they as they’ve ever been in 2019. The bailout to the farmers is now bigger net net than the bail out of the car companies under the Obama administration because of the fight with China and the tariff battles with with other countries. If you were a compelling candidate who could make the case to rural voters and you believed and again that where there is some things implicit in what I’m saying that some people don’t believe because some people believe these voters are gone and it’s all about identity not economics and therefore why should a Democrat spend a lot of time doing that.


S9: But back to your basic point David the Republican coalition has those two states and the Democratic coalition doesn’t have it enough in Georgia and Texas that this cycle they’ll be able to make inroads if you believe in a warren kind of candidacy a pure base riled the base up candidacy which is essentially what Trump is running on the Republican side. You could try to make a case for Georgia and Texas. But the problem is if you run heavy towards turning out the liberal coalition in those states you would weaken your ability so goes the theory in the six states that are that are closest. And that’s another reason they picked these six that have a more mixed electorate as the Times sees it.


S1: And most people see Emily last question on this topic. So Jon Chait in New York magazine some subsection of New York Magazine I kept reports one concludes that the leftward tilt of the Democrat candidate is turning out to be a disaster that they’ve lost touch with median voters. They desperately need to get back to the center before they find themselves with an unelectable candidate. Is it the case that that Warren and Sanders are essentially giving themselves Iron Crosses they’ve hung iron crosses around their neck for the general election. I find myself wishing that Moran had not come up with a Medicare for all tax plan. I really wish that she had just said you know it’ll be magic which is what Republicans say all the time about their plans. It’s always like oh it’ll be magic and economic growth magic. Do you think that you should be able to run away from that or is it really something that is going to dragger.


S2: I mean when people move to the ideological edge of their parties and primaries right Republicans move to the right. Democrats moved to the left. The ideas then you tack back to the center in the general election. There’s plenty of time. I do wonder about what these candidates are thinking in terms of not sticking with the most popular positions. Now obviously Warren wants to be able to attract Bernie Sanders voters and you know I had with zero reporting. You could imagine that she is trying to make sure that if and when Sanders drops out he full throated Lee endorses her. And so she becomes the candidate of the far left. I also think she believes in Medicare for all. And yet there is so much that these Democratic candidates could do for health care or for example on immigration with a path to citizenship that is broadly popular that one wonders whether it would be politically wiser to stick to those positions. I mean this is a question that people like Matt Iglesias at Fox have been asking for months. And when they you know put up the poll numbers every time it looks pretty persuasive to me as just a matter of pragmatic politics what looks persuasive fits with broadly popular positions that are more centrist and that actually could become law would be smarter like we are not going to immediately have Medicare for all. So we’re having they’re taking Warren and Sanders particularly Warren are taking a big political risk for something that doesn’t seem particularly reality based. And so then does it. Is it really necessary.


S11: Rae was so this is as you quite rightly pointed out this is always the problem with primaries it’s why people have think the primaries are part of the reason our politics are so messed up because everybody has to get into a very not only far left but also detached debate as a kind of way to signal to their electorates that they are more pure than the next person to your point Emily about what the environment’s gonna look like a year from now let’s imagine a Democrat wins. OK. So a Democrat wins if they win it will have been on a restoration ticket which is to say well we’re going to fix things post Donald Trump.


S9: That gives you a huge to do list. Just to start the day. OK. Before you get to Medicare for all you’ve got a lot of stuff to do to restore. And by the way most of it’s going to be overseas and some large portion of it is going gonna be secret. So there’s that. Second of all the intervening election over that year the next year is gonna be scorched earth. So how you’re gonna get this through a Medicare for all through Congress even through trying to use reconciliation after that year seems more unlikely than it even would be today. As you quite rightly said Emily you go to do you go to the left or you go to the left or the right in your primaries and come back to the middle but that also depends on a you know politics has changed a little bit in terms of the public square when you can make that case that you’re not exactly the person you ran in the primaries as being it’s harder to do that now. Secondly which of these candidates has the facility and ability to make that case. Or do they keep stepping on their you know their or their shoes tied together. And so that’s one question can they even get back to that position and then the question is What do you guys think that position looks like in the general election for a Democrat to to either undermine the president’s coalition or to build success in areas like the suburbs where you’ve seen some of these opportunities for Democrats.


S1: I cannot let this segment pass John without noting what is surely the most important electoral result from Tuesday surprising result out of New Haven Connecticut which just elected a 19 year old a 19 year old is one of its alders and this 19 year old won a staggering 90 percent of the vote. What do you make of the overwhelming mandate won by Eli Fabian whose mother is noted political commentator Emily Bazelon. Just how significant do you feel this victory is for the future of the Republic.


S8: Well fortunately for all those people who feel jittery about the state of the future and the State of the republic really about whether there is verifiable truth in these troubled times that we live in now I think not just the people in the in the quiet suburbs of New Haven and the urban centers of that city but also really across the country in the world can find themselves sleeping easier now as a result of that outcome.


S13: Emily mazel tov congratulations on your son’s victory.


S2: Thank you. My son is now in our city council so it’s going to be really interesting to watch.


S13: Eli is so excited and thrilled we DFS listeners have our annual conundrum show coming up live at the Fox Theater in Oakland California on December 18th and have a very exciting announcement which we have a great guest. As you know every year we try to get a very wise philosophical minded person to help us solve conundrum for you. This year no different. We have an amazing guest Adam Savage of myth busters is going to join us at the Fox Theater on December 18th. No one has done a keener analysis of the true questions Americans fret about about the real myths and blowing up the real myths. He’s so funny and smart and interesting and I’m so excited he’s going to join us so you can still get tickets for that show at Slate dot com slash live to see us tackle conundrums with Adam Savage again. Slate dot com flash live December 18th in Oakland public hearings on impeachment are expected to begin on Wednesday in front of the House Intelligence Committee featuring witnesses who have already testified behind closed doors. Impeachment it seems to me is circling around two main tracks first track is are Democrats moving fast enough and with enough clarity to maintain and even build public support for the process and harm the president undermine the president undermine Republicans even if they don’t break the Republican firewall and actually remove him from office. Second there is this kind of process question which is what is going to happen in this massive showdown between legislature and presidency over testimony tax return privileges witnesses. And how is the judicial branch going to referee that if at all. John let’s start with the substance of the week.


S7: So there’s always a ton of impeachment news these days. Some of the news this week was that Gordon Sunlen the ambassador to the EU who had been engaged in the shadow foreign policy along with Rudy Giuliani conceded he reversed himself he essentially said I misled Congress earlier when I said I did not talk about a quid pro quo but there was a quid pro quo whereby we were telling the Ukrainians they had to launch this investigation of the Bidens in order to free up the military aid that Congress had appropriated. So that’s a that was a big deal. There was this talk of a press conference that Bill Barr did not hold there on Thursday as we’re taping a one of Mike Pence’s key aides is testifying. What in your mind are the key substantive things that happened with impeachment this week.


S8: I think Sunlen was the biggest news because Sunlen said he told Ukrainian officials that military aid was tied to their commitment to the president. Sunlen as you remember had plenty of conversations with the president about this. Adam Schiff scheduled I think also the first impeachment hearing which is on the 15th November. I think what what is still at issue and then Republicans are gathering or are trying to close ranks the president has hired some people to help him with his impeachment defense. What is still at issue and this is very hard to put a finger on is whether the argument is that the president did not try to use his job to influence the government of Ukraine to look into Joe Biden that he didn’t do it at all or that he did it.


S14: But it’s not impeachable.


S6: There’s also a third third kind of nutty thing which is he did it but because the you because Ukraine didn’t launch the investigation into Biden it doesn’t matter which Emily will tell me if this is right or wrong but that’s not the way the law works. And also in Nixon’s case some of the things that drove him for office never came to pass resemble that particular defense right. One lawyer said the only way you can claim that defense is if what you were originally plotting to do is actually impossible. So build a ray gun in your backyard that uses marshmallows and golf balls as its primary source of energy mate that’s impossible shoot down your neighbor but damn it anyway.


S15: But he has to do that.


S10: But I think John the thing that makes me so despondent about all of this is that the record of the Trump presidency seems to be that the partisan divide is so strong that you will he’ll get away with this and the people people’s memories are so short and they there’s so many outrages that happen every week in this presidency that people are like can’t even believe. I mean I can’t even you know what Michael Cohen’s testimony. I mean every every month there’s something which is like wow this is really the breaking point this is shocking. No one will accept this like look look what has been conceded on the record that he’s now done and it doesn’t stick. And he and he so has lowered standards so much and he has thrown so much chaff out there and there’s so much confusion and so much willingness to accept misbehavior on his part by his supporters that people are frustrated and they are disillusioned and disengaged. And I’m sorry just to pile on this point one last point. Last week we were talking about oh there’s gonna be mass protests where’s the mass protest why is there not mass protest. That was this that was the subject of last week we’re just six days later and there’s been that that whole topic is gone. The idea that mass protest would come out of this is God it could come. No I don’t know people but I think people are. People have moved into a state of disillusion and inaction because they’re so frustrated because the president has done such a good job of destroying the integrity of the political system and and making people doubt doubt truth and and doubt whether they can get anything done. And and so.


S2: Well I think you have to sort out you think there’s more public support for impeachment. It’s just that there’s also this hardcore of Trump supporters who are not budging.


S9: I think you have to sort things into their boxes here a little bit. So first of all Democrats in the elections that just took place. Everything I read suggests that actually one of the challenges for Republicans is that Donald Trump seems to be an incredible motivator and turnout mechanism for Democratic voters. If the best turnout mechanism for your base is the president then it allows candidates to spend some time reaching into into parts of the electorate that are not a part of their base. I think the impeachment process to the extent that it goes forward and you are a Republican senator who has to vote do I think it’s going to lead to the president’s impeachment. I think everything you have said and everything we’ve seen and the tribal reaction we’ve seen to run down people of good standing in order to defend the president whose whose behavior whether it’s impeachable or not certainly breaks many of the standards that a lot of the politicians have spent their career saying must be maintained or will lead to the destruction of American life and culture. So I think the fact that people have held tight for partisan reasons. You have to bet on that. So I don’t think there’s anything that suggests that the Senate is going to vote to remove him but the process going forward I think does put again some of those particularly senators who are up for re-election and each of them in a position where they have to if they do say look this is bad but not impeachable then they do at some point have to answer. OK but you wouldn’t you since you admit that it happened but it’s not impeachable you’re also saying it’s OK that the president lied and that’s bad but not impeachable. I think to just have people on the record that’s a useful thing to happen. Where and how it leads. We don’t know but it’s good to have people on the record about what what the standards are and whether this president has exceeded them or fallen below them.


S2: I just want to say that I hold open a window for Republican senators shifting positions in light of these public hearings. Public hearings mattered a lot in Watergate. And I just want to keep the possibility open that they could matter again even though we live in a much more polarized time both in our politics and our media.


S13: Emily let’s talk about some of these process questions which I know you’ve thought about you’ve a piece in The Times about it. There’s a huge question about whether the House is going to be able to compel people associate with the president. His closest aides to testify or to supply any key documents for the moment. They seem to be saying forget it we’re not going to bother we’re not going to go through the legal process to try to get this even though maybe we have the right to get it just because it will take too long. Where do you see this showdown going. Or maybe there’ll be no showdown.


S16: So no.


S2: Well yeah actually. So I think that the Democrats are playing it smart right now. And what I mean by that is that you’re right. Congress has this right to investigate. It has this power it’s had it since the founding since the Nixon era presidents have been increasingly asserting what’s called executive privilege more boldly over more material executive privilege just means they’re supposed to be some private zone of confidential communications in the White House for the president so he can communicate with candor with his aides like that makes sense. We don’t know how far that zone extends. There is actually very little court precedent from this. The Supreme Court has actually never had a case in which it had to decide between the power of Congress to subpoena witnesses and evidence. And the president’s right to claim executive privilege. They just we just don’t know the answer. What has been remarkable although not really surprising about the Trump administration is they are claiming absolute immunity for any witness it who doesn’t want to testify. So it’s not like we want to litigate whether a specific set of material or a set of questions are covered by executive privilege. It’s Don McGann former White House counsel doesn’t even need to show up that litigation is all happening outside of the parameters of the impeachment inquiry because I think Adam Schiff and whoever else is making these decisions for the Democrats is seeing that litigation take a long time and he’s saying no we’re not going to get dragged into long court battles. And so there was this interesting detail that John helpfully noted for me this week where we had a lawsuit from this guy Charles Cooperman who is a John Bolton need has the same lawyer as John Bolton and he had taken it upon himself to go to court himself and say I’m caught between these two competing demands Congress is telling me to show up and the president is telling me not to and I don’t know what to do and I’m suing both of them and the Congress withdrew the subpoena of cup ramen this week saying basically like you don’t want to come. This is going to take too long. We’re not getting waylaid by this and you can see that it is like Congress folding its tent. But given just the time parameters of this kind of litigation I think it was the right call. And so I think you’re right we may basically avoid a showdown in the courts and what Congress is counting on and what is working really well so far is that if you have a willing witness it’s not at all clear that executive privilege is a sword that Trump can wield. And so as long as the people who are career professionals and Trump appointees like Gordon Sandlin want to keep coming up and giving this damning testimony against the president I think that Congress is going to forego the witnesses who don’t want to come. The most interesting witness we don’t know the answer to so far is John Bolton himself. He’s had a lot of obviously direct communication with Trump. He is in the middle of this. One could imagine that some of the leaks involving the damning evidence against Trump relate to Bolton and his people. But we just don’t know whether he’s going to comply with a subpoena again.


S17: Emily can we just put to bed this funny notion and as you say it’s laughable.


S8: But man it’s getting a lot of people who are in jobs vetting the president making this argument the argument that well yes he was he was trying to influence Ukraine but since they didn’t they weren’t influenced. It’s not wrong. We’ve already talked about why that’s not. But in law the reason that’s not the case with the reason we don’t want that to be the case is because we don’t want to incentivize people to make attempts. Is that correct Emily Madeleine.


S15: Yes it is an attempted murder is it.


S2: Don’t cry and we want attempted murder to be a crime because we don’t want you to be able to try to kill someone and fail for reasons that were outside of your control like you’re a really bad shot or whatever and that is still a crime and we want to be able to do the shoe bomber shoe bomber is spending life in prison. Last time I checked when you think about it it’s kind of an odd distinction because from the point of view if you really think someone tried to kill someone and they didn’t succeed like who cares they are just as culpable. But we do make that distinction. I mean think about drunk driving if you got get caught driving drunk but you don’t hurt someone that is a lesser charge or lesser penalty than if you hurt someone but you’re taking the same risk in both situations.


S1: That is a that is a really good question. Wait philosophically do you. Are you. I’ve got I’ve got another one open. Do you guys think you guys think that the him at this point attempting something and failing is as bad as attempting and succeeding. Like for example if you wanted to hire you could be arrested for trying to hire a contract killer and failing because a contract killer actually is a you know an FBI informant. And so it never happened but there are all sorts of steps even after you’ve hired your contract killer where you could have said your contract killer you know what. I regret that. Let’s not do that. And so actually you would have had a chance to stop it so maybe like doing things which you don’t fully follow through on. It does seem like you you shouldn’t be punished as much as things you fully follow through on. Drunk driving is interesting case because it’s kind of out of your control whether you fully follow through on it.


S14: Let me ask let me ask you this question on me which is that does the would the sentencing change if you as the attempted murderer or attempted bank robber had a special community position that you were running afoul of.


S8: So if you were a policeman and you tried to kill a relative you have to trust an authority in the government John. There you go. Would that change the sentencing. And then if you were to come up with a scale of people who have a special stewardship and trust in the government where would you rank the president on maintaining that trust in that ranking.


S15: Oh I would write the president high since he is commander in chief.


S2: And yeah we definitely have laws where if you’re in the government and you abuse your position of trust that is its own crime. I mean this is just I don’t know what to say like there is a way in which one of the most revealing parts of all of this are the length the arguments that people who are defending Trump are willing to make the length to which they are willing to go and I think obviously that’s the broader point you’re making. And you know David’s right. It is succeeding to a dismaying degree.


S8: Like even if it doesn’t persuade most of the country it is enough for lots of people who just want to look past this conduct and some people say to even raise the questions that people are using in bad faith to defend the president is to give them energy and I’m sympathetic to that because I’ve been you know saying for ever that fact checking gives energy to the underlying lie even if you think you’re doing your right duty. But I do think in this case one of the things at issue with any president and this one in particular is whether the the lengths to which people will go to defend you because the presidency is an honored post in them in American life. And we should all in some very vague sense rush to the defense of a president obviously a job created with fear of monarchy wouldn’t want that as its single qualification. But but but I’m saying there is a rallying around a president that is a part of the tradition. And therefore when you do something as a president knowing that rallying effect takes place you are messing with a public trust here. So it’s there is in these defenses and the extremity of the defenses you’re. It’s actually also part it seems to me of the case because when you were president you your actions are not cabin by the thing you did on a single phone call. They have all of these other effects which is a part of your job in your office. And all of those effects are built into the office. So you need to think about it quite broadly it seems to me it doesn’t mean that that you need to impeach or that you need to convict. But it does. It means that it’s much more than a single phone call and it includes to the crazy things people may say in your defense that have no basis in the human world that we exist in and breathe in today.


S7: Slate Plus members get bonus segments on the Gabfest and other Slate podcasts. So if you go to Slate dot com slash gabfest plus you can become a member of Slate Plus today all Eugen Zee Slate Plus members are you Boomer Slate Plus members are you Gen Y. Slate Plus members and even all you not millennial. Does a Gen Y are the Gen Xers like me and John Emily. We’re gonna talk about okay. Boomer so you’re gonna you’re gonna get it. We’re gonna start some generational warfare and you get that as your bonus segment today President announced that the United States will withdraw from the Paris climate accord official announcement. This is the 2015 Global Agreement asking for voluntary emissions reductions by most of the nations of the world. The president announced the withdrawal on the first day that the United States could announce its legal withdrawal from this. The withdrawal will not take effect for one year. So not until November 4th 2020 the day after the presidential election. So under any circumstance the U.S. will be withdrawn from this treaty for at least some period of time presumably a new president could put us back into it. But it will. We will be withdrawn for a bit. Emily it’s kind of not a surprise. I mean the president has rolled back emission standards for cars he’s loosened standards for coal plants he’s gutted subsidies for renewables you name it. He has done done it. If when it comes to when it comes to weakening protections for the climate and undermining attempts to decrease emissions. So is this actually important that he’s doing this yeah it’s important.


S2: This is the worldwide climate agreement that’s supposed to get countries moving towards saving the planet. You know the saving grace of this is that he had to give a year’s notice. And so this will actually go into effect the day after the 2020 elections which means that if Trump is not re-elected it could effectively be stopped. And it puts into stark relief the choice that voters will be facing and making in November about the United States and whether it’s going to be responsible in its reaction to climate change and whether it’s going to join with other nations in this like to play a crucial collective enterprise.


S7: So when it comes to something like this. So the Paris accord I think there are two different kinds of critiques of it one that critique from the right. Is this just really hurts American interests and hurts American competitiveness and it’s it’s other countries taking advantage of America and wrecking our economic growth. That’s the one side and from the left it’s this is a very this is weak tea it’s a voluntary set of goals. It’s not. There are no requirements. Why why does it even matter. Because no one even has to hit it. What why. Why is it important despite those two critiques.


S9: Well you just got to start somewhere. I mean collective action has to collect and cohere around something and once you once you build the formulations and the and structure for agreement then you can ratchet things up. We’ve also seen since the original agreement the targets which I believe are two degrees Celsius we’re now at one degree increase in some parts of the world I think and a quarter of the globe it’s already one point five. The problem has gotten worse by the targets of the original measurement. So that’s a problem and creates that sense of urgency. But if you don’t have something that gets everybody around the table and works towards these goals even if they’re somewhat voluntary then you have to kind of start all over again which is what we’re talking about if there’s a new president they would have to start all over again which I would just interject quickly in terms of turnout mechanism for younger voters in particular for whom this is a voting issue which again gives a Democratic candidate some wiggle room because if those if they’re going to turn out because you can make the case look climate’s really going to be screwed if you don’t elect a Democrat then that gives a Democratic presidential candidate some wiggle room with other parts of the constituency that they need to work hard.


S1: Although I would I would argue that the counter of that John which is that the conservative position and the Trump position has kind of morphed in a subtle way. It’s no it’s not really so much this isn’t happening that the full throated denial the kind of bogus denial which they’ve pushed forward have vanished and instead it’s moved into what I think is a more effective sort of messaging which is you just say Green New Deal AOC socialists wreck the economy crush jobs and that I don’t know that’s more effective as a turnout mechanism for the right than what you just described is for young voters on the left.


S7: But it is a I think it’s a more I think it’s a better argument because it is more realistic and it does have an actual it’s almost put the numbers on something that says oh yeah these guys are trying to destroy this strong industry that we have and take away American jobs and take away jobs and timber and fracking and in petro resorts.


S18: All right. Yeah it has to. Yes. Yes. Come on. I don’t endorse it. Yes go ahead.


S2: No no I just I can’t stand to keep hearing it for so long. We already even in our denial list are skeptic economy. We already are employing twice as many people in solar as we are in coal in the United States. Meanwhile though we’re letting China just like have this market. So this is from John Kerry and Chuck Hagel op ed from. For every dollar the United States invest in renewable energy. China is putting in three or just like ceding this whole territory even as the cost of producing Aaron wind is coming way way down and that kind of renewable energy is competitive.


S12: There is a huge economic opportunity here.


S1: And yet if you think about it as an economic question not simply just Oh green cushy green silliness it’s actually economics. This is where jobs are. This is where economic opportunity is. This is where growth is. And it’s it’s demoralizing as hell that that these people who claim to believe in economic growth and claim to believe in innovation in the future are just throwing it away. It’s maddening.


S9: It seems to me if you have younger voters who care about this issue and are going to vote on it and be propelled by it then what it does is it frees you up to make precisely the case you’re making and that Wal-Mart is making and that all of these individual companies that have joined together to push behavior that is renewable and that supports wind and solar that you can make that case to to save suburban voters you can say look this isn’t about this is about economic the economic future and development of the United States it’s not just about these you know Fuzzy lefty ideas. These are smart economic decisions to make about America’s future. It seems to me you have lots of free market private enterprise people who would who would join you and who would buy that argument. This is going to be an incredibly negative election. So I think there’s going to be so much ugly uglier things said about Democrats to caricature them or characterize them that that climate actually probably wouldn’t you know they’ll do uglier things first.


S2: Yeah but then we also have to take into account the disproportionate political power of the people who could be losers from this economic shift. Right. So it’s the manufacturing center it’s people in Kentucky and West Virginia and Pennsylvania who are still involved in coal mining and other extractive industries. And those folks really matter in the Electoral College.


S1: What I understand is like the people what issue is a proxy for what. Yeah but yeah the people who the people who live in Miami like if you think about Florida that’s a big state. People live in Georgia. Florida is a state that may well not exist in its substantive form in 50 years. If you live in Miami you own any real estate Miami and you’re not incredibly concerned about climate change. You’re a fucking moron.


S19: And so I just don’t I don’t understand if you own any beach described that many beachfront properties you own any beachfront property on the East Coast if you’re on coastal North Carolina and you’re a voter if you’re on coastal Georgia and you’re a voter if you’re anywhere in coastal Florida and you’re a voter and you’re not thinking about that as an issue like you’re just wanting to give away your most valuable asset. And the thing that you know brings you probably the most joy. So I don’t I find it. Yes you should. Yes. The Kentucky voter the West Virginia voter the Pennsylvania voter who works in coal country. Sure. They’re valuable but these these there are tons of people who are going to be affected by climate change. You know if you’re in Colorado and there are droughts that are hitting you and you cannot farm the way you want to farm it. People need to be attuned to their economic interests and b think Oh yeah. That’s actually an important voting issue for me which they’re not. Right now.


S6: Right. But. But if we look at those six states we talked about earlier Michigan Pennsylvania Wisconsin Arizona only in Florida in North Carolina fit in the basket that you’re talking about. So if you were having to make a calculation of what your overall position was that swept in as many states as possible I think you would have you would have to be more worried about how that message would be received in manufacturing centered states more than coastal states particularly if you’re a Democrat in your coastal at least I think you know you’re coastal votes may already be with you in Florida all right.


S7: Let us go to cocktail chatter when you’re sitting in your beachfront property on a deck watching the waves lap up ever closer ever closer ever closer. What are you gonna be chattering about as you drink and elegiac cocktail.


S2: Emily Bazelon I am so just this week about a story that colleges universities have been buying the names of high school kids who take the S.A.T. and don’t look like strong enough candidates to get into said colleges and universities. But the colleges and universities reach out to them and market to them and make it seem like hey you have a good shot. And then they reject them. What is the point of doing this. The schools do it to drive up their selectivity rates because that helps them in the horrible but powerful U.S. News and World Report rankings that continue to sort of stalk us like a terrible ghost of U.S. News and World Report which otherwise I feel like doesn’t even exist anymore. Who knows. And then there’s also the cost to these students and their families. The psychological toll of applying to schools that actually you don’t have a shot at getting into. And then the actual cost of paying the application fees the whole thing just makes me ill. And it is just one more nail in the coffin for the S.A.T. which I would just be so happy if we got rid of it forever.


S20: JOHN DICKERSON What’s your chatter.


S8: My chatter is kind of twofold. But I was reading a piece about going to Mars in the independent about how long it would take and all the things that would have to be taken into account. And it seemed completely obvious after reading it but wasn’t to me in my initial thinking about it that you know three years on a on a ship to Mars and back you’re gonna have to handle all your own surgery and. And like even small like kidney stones could become fatal in that environment where you’re basically in a tin can for three years. And so anyway I tweeted that not incredible revelation but anyway. And Paul McGrane said it reminded him of a story that you guys probably already know but that I don’t think I knew but which is about the Soviet doctor who was in Antarctica. Yeah in 19 1960 Leonid Rojas of who had to perform his own appendectomy because there was there was not a doctor or even a medical station for a thousand miles. And the snow was blowing and anyway so basically he had to use some Novocaine and a mirror and two friends one of whom was I think a meteorologist. The other was a driver to basically help him do surgery on himself and when he opened up his stomach he found that in fact the the appendix was about ready to blow. So he probably would’ve had one more day before it would’ve blown and then I think it would have been impossible. That’s a pretty amazing thing to do surgery on yourself and be successful which he was. He had apparently to stop at various intervals while he was doing it because he got a little woozy which you know fair enough but that was an amazing story of the human spirit.


S7: Know that’s much harder much harder. I’ll double dip a little bit first of all I want to alert everyone if you are a Philip Pullman fan you have probably heard that his Dark Materials is now a TV show from the BBC and HBO so HBO started airing his Dark Materials which is Pullman’s trilogy amazing. My favorite books I’ve talked about them before on the show and the HBO series. There’s an eight episode start which is just the first book The Golden Compass and I was the first episode ran this week. It’s great and it’s apparently from those who’ve seen the whole thing it’s gonna be better.


S2: So check that out but also deal with promise because I am afraid to watch this. I’m so attached to these books I’ve never watched the movie and I’m only going to watch it if you really care.


S1: It’s good it’s good it’s really good. I is it. They’re not as good as the books. I mean the books are on a saleable great but it is much much better than the movie and it’s so far it seems good. I’ll watch a little further and let you know.


S8: Also his Pullman had I feel like you took a little back on now.


S1: Well it’s too soon to tell is it. You know the first hour of 8:00 if I watched but also Pullman’s second book in his second trilogy. So he’s writing it. He wrote the His Dark Materials trilogy and now he’s reading it written writing a second trilogy called The Book of dust. The first book came out a couple of years ago it was called ad lib belts of ash and was terrible and now the second book. Oh I didn’t know it was true.


S18: No it’s bad it’s really bad so unworthy of the first trilogy.


S8: Well that’s different from whether it’s on whether the trilogy or just about right.


S7: Really bad. Anyway the second book The Secret Commonwealth just came out. I think it’s coming out now. I got my hands on an early copy maybe and it’s really good. It’s not quite as good as his Dark Materials but it’s really good. It catches Lyra at a wonderful moment it returns all I write catches Lyra at 20 or 19 maybe and she’s a college student and then all sorts of events from her past are coming back to to interrupt her and it’s it’s a it’s really interesting on her relationship with Pan that they’re adults and it’s got a lot of the adventure. Her demon demon her demon is her demon demon demon so it’s it’s good to check it out. The other thing is just a little bit of self-involved chatter which is I don’t think I’ve talked about this before but I am looking for my next thing so I’m going to be leaving Atlas Obscura we’re hunting for a new CEO. If you know a great person who could be CEO of Atlas Obscura let me know. But I’m gonna be handing the reins off there and doing something new and I’m starting to think about what that would be. And maybe you have a great idea for me. The only constraint is that it has to be something I can do from Washington primarily. So if you have a great idea please just send me an email at the gab fest email address and if it’s late dot com and I would love to hear your wonderful idea. Listeners you sent us excellent chatters yourselves this week please keep them coming. Tweet to us at Slate gabfest with your wonderful article or piece of culture or song or historical episode whatever it is. And this week it was a very David Plotz The kind of listener chatter that I got a call out from at Shaw of Shaw and it’s a story that ran in CNN and elsewhere about a boat that was trapped above Niagara Falls 100 years ago in 1918 hundred one years ago. It was a kind of an iron boat that that in a midst of a storm got trapped they had to rescue the two people are on the boat and the boat got lodged on a rock about 600 feet above the falls and it just stuck there it was there for 100 years. And this week it moved it hadn’t moved in a hundred years and it dislodged and moved around and it’s now come to a different resting place above the falls. I think it’s above the falls. No one wants to mess with it. No one wants to get near it because it’s too risky. But I love the idea of this thing it’s just sitting there for 100 years and then decides because there’s a particularly violent storm a lot of wind and rain and it’s like All right I’m going to move now. So nice story from shore off shore that is.


S21: It’s a metaphor for our times it is yes serious anthropomorphizing of Iraq that you just did boat. It’s a boat a boat boat whatever. Yeah well we give them we give them names and actually the Philip Pullman book the last one was called La Belle some of which is the name of the boat. It was a book about a boat and as we agreed it was there was a terrible shock that.


S4: Is our show for today the political gaffe that was produced by Jocelyn Frank a researcher is Bridget Dunlap Debbie Roth is editorial director and to Thomas managing producer Slate podcasts. Ellen pang in New York Ryan McAvoy in New Haven and Mr. Kaplan here in D.C. helped engineer the show you should follow us on Twitter. That’s like gab fest. We chatted to us and come to our live show on December 18th at the Fox Theater in Oakland California. Annual conundrum show with Adam Savage as our guest host go to slate that complex live. For tickets for Emily Babylon. Mother mother of a city council member and alder in New Haven.


S22: And John Dickerson Father of Dragons. I’m David Plotz. Thank you for listening. We’ll talk to.


S23: Hello Slate Plus how are you.


S1: I don’t know what age you are. Slate Plus I’m guessing you’re more likely to be in the millennial or Gen X age bracket. So you probably in the kind of thirty to fifty five age bracket judging judging just a guess because also that’s where John and Emily and I all are. But I don’t know. Maybe you’re not. Maybe you’re 16 years old maybe you’re 73 years old. I don’t know. But this week we had this very funny generational meme that is now spread around. Okay Boomer why is okay. What is OK. Boomer Emily why is it. Why is it. And why do it catch the imagination.


S12: Oh no you’re asking me or I can explain it the last to hear about this. Can you explain. OK.


S24: So essentially it’s it is a it’s a what lovely kind of dismissive tossed off phrase that that Gen Z folks the I guess I don’t know where you define gems. It’s like of sub 25 maybe sub 30. Folks are saying as a way to deflate the smugness of the old and it’s aimed at boomers but I guess it also probably encompasses us we are some boomers and the notion is these these older people are too often telling the young ODA to learn something and stop being so stop being so sensitive. Stop being so Whoa. Stop. Stop doing you know stop criticising us Stop stop talking about subjects you don’t understand you’re too young to understand and this is a quick excellent little dismissive phrase that popped up as a way to to to give the back of a hand to old people and it’s just caught on very quickly I’m sure it will explode and die very quickly too in the way that these things do but everyone all of a sudden was talking about it and enjoying it and even you’ve got this great spectacle of baby boomers maybe but we’re saying it was ageism and that saying this to somebody was was a form of age. Age based harassment and you should file an EEOC EEOC complaint about it. So John then is this. Well you know what why. Why are people why do people get agitated about it. And fun have. Why are they having such fun with it.


S9: Well because we are in the age of we are in an age of constant agitation. And by the way one of the generational claims against the boomers was that they were so self-involved that they couldn’t get past themselves and see anything larger which is what kept them in gated communities walled off from the greatest generation. And so some people see in their thin skinned reaction to OK Boomer evidence of the original claims against boomers which is that they were totally self obsessed and that basically they should relax and recognize that this is basically just a new form of the sort of get off my lawn critique which is you know basically you’re like a cranky old and cranky olds are sometimes out of touch. A new New Zealand lawmaker Chloe swore Brick was giving a speech about climate change and a climate crisis bill and he was heckled by an older member of parliament and cheap and she deployed this OK boomer. And then kept talking but she did it in a kind of unfazed. You know she just like dropped it in and then moved on it was it was well deployed because now the problem is it’s become such a thing that to successfully deploy it has to actually it seems to me to account for all of the irony required by the fact that it’s now been discussed so much.


S2: I mean just if you want to be really clever Is there any legitimacy to generational warfare. I mean I’m generally such a skeptic of this. It’s like who says when one generation begins and another one ends and maybe I experience and maybe I experience some particular bitterness because I feel like our generation which is called Gen X is the sort of past over the least powerful most inner generation and so I just don’t like this whole concept. I don’t know. I just feel like there always are young people complaining about old people the old people are always kind of thin skinned about it. They are also constantly thinking that the youth has gone awry. Like is this anything new or is it just like the usual tensions that we experience around generational conflicts.


S1: Yes it is the usual tensions we experience but I think it gets heightened and less heightened at different points. I I sort of feel that we are actually in the 1960s and haven’t quite cottoned on to it yet.


S25: I think the level of the level of social anxiety of social stress is very very high.


S10: There is the kind of gap on certain political markers it’s gotten wider between young and old. The cultural distinctions are very profound.


S1: I think that what you see around what people like our age called weakness and I think younger people do not call weakness because that’s a condescending word is.


S2: Yeah well it was an okay boom are of the same dismissive flavour right.


S7: Weakness is what older people say to younger people about their their beliefs about you know whatever sexuality Gen they actually know the word race because they know yes and well this has a kind of is in the ante room next to virtue signalling Anyway carry on.


S24: So I do think there is there. I think what we have is among the young. There’s a really deep disillusion about the future and anxiety about the future which is which is similar to what we saw in the 60s as as with Vietnam and with the later the later Watergate and the kind of sense of the loss of legitimacy in the system. And I think even though you would have expected.


S1: I think what’s what’s actually remarkable is that after the 2008 2009 financial crisis you would have expected millennials to be super disillusioned and agitated and they kind of didn’t end up that way. They ended up continuing to buy into a system and I think that the the youth of today are much less willing and they are they are much less invested in the system that exists and and therefore we are kind of in the middle of what will when we look back will feel as momentous and as contentious and changing world changing as what the 60s did. I just don’t think we haven’t we haven’t quite been able to see it yet. Okay. Boomers just one small tiny manifestation of that by the way the reason the millennials didn’t do anything is because they’re basically lazy.


S26: There’s a reason they didn’t do anything. No the reason they didn’t do anything.


S1: I know you’re joking that the reason they didn’t do anything is they were so they need to fucking scramble for jobs.


S9: They were suddenly found I’m saying lazy yes no I know I know I was taking the low hanging fruit in my generation but here’s the thing here’s the thing I wonder about actually though is that so when the boomers were being self-indulgent there was a there was a smaller group of the generation that preceded them that could recognise in the boomers what they had gone through. I mean they might have wrecked right. You recognised it like in private and so forth. But but what I wonder is now we are all as a culture more kind of mixed in other words you’ll see you know casual dress Friday and you’ll see you know in Silicon Valley everybody looks dress is the same whether they’re 18 or 68 and if. And so I wonder if it was a part of this dynamic in any way or if it just how it affects the dynamic the fact that we have people who do not fit in the traditional roles of adulthood in our generation the way the traditional roles of adulthood were pretty locked in in the greatest generation when they had their clash with the baby boomers. And I don’t know whether that how that affects the picture but it certainly does seem to be the case that you have people who who is a part of their daily lives don’t see any benefit in maintaining the structures of adulthood that used to define adulthood the way you dress the family kind of family you had the the way you comported yourself and so forth.


S2: Huh that’s interesting. I was going to bring up something I can’t tell if it’s related or not. I mean I guess you could make the argument that with all of those former distinctions of adulthood categories gone that maybe distinctions of language are kind of taking their place in marking the boundaries but between the generations and among the generations I’ve actually been thinking about this a lot lately and I feel like I’m turning into a reactionary on questions of language policing like let’s just stipulate there are certainly words and terms that used to be common we don’t use them anymore. That is like an unalloyed good. And language evolves and that’s totally fine. But I feel like I sometimes hear an obsession with language policing on the left right now that seems Manute and counter-productive and alienating not necessarily to me personally but to like large enough sectors of the American public that I really worry about it. And I mean I don’t think Oh I think okay boomer like whatever it just is a sort of dismissive insult and I wouldn’t put it into this category but I feel like there’s worshipping of language purity right now that is is not a good idea. Like people don’t like to be told or to feel that they’re talking wrong. And so when they do talk wrong like OK but let’s reserve the idea of talking wrong for really important missteps and not just like things that are very much still in play. And so for example there was discussion this week about the term Latin X which people on the left have adopted for Latino and Latina people because it’s gender neutral. But it turns out that lots of people in this pan identity of Latino Latina Hispanic those are first of all those words are all made up anyway but lots people don’t like Latin X and you know we’re talking about people from a variety of nationalities right from everywhere to like Mexico to Venezuela to Brazil or I should say a variety of national origin. And we’ve never really figured out what that pan identity doesn’t make a whole lot of sense to begin with. But then to impose a word on it that the left has selected for its own reasons that the people most of those people don’t like it just seems like a problem.


S20: Yeah well said.


S27: Yeah okay okay. Boomers now okay.


S7: Boomers okay. Boomer but I just said okay boomers because I was just saying goodbye. Okay. Boomers okay. Gen Xers OK. Greatest Generation. I wonder if we have any Greatest Generation listeners okay. Millennials okay Gen Y Okay Jonesy okay.


S12: Jen’s that have not even been imagined. Exactly. Good night socks.


S7: Good night clocks. Make it connect to recite Goodnight Moon and the great green room with a telephone and a red balloon and a picture of the cow jumping over the moon. And three little bears sitting in chairs and two little kittens and a pair of mittens and little toy house and a young mouse.


S1: And a comb. I’m sure. It me and a comb and oppression bowl full of mush and quiet old lady who was whispering hush whispering hush.


S23: Good night moon Good night. Room Good night cow jumping over the moon. Good night light and the red balloon.


S27: Good night bears Good night terrors Good night kittens Good night mittens Good night clocks Good night socks good night come.


S1: Good night. Brush. Good night nobody. Good night. Mush. And good night to the Oh. Old lady whispering hush.


S12: No no you just went backwards. I was I know I miss the way that you’re doing.


S26: And isn’t there Good night. Good night noises every Oh yeah. Good night Good night stars night noises good nights.


S23: Good night. Good night air. Good night noises everywhere. Right. Nice. Nice. There we go.


S26: It was a night. That was impressive.


S11: None of us had to read that book in eight years probably when I read that. What for me. Golly it’s probably. Yeah. You guys. For you a twelve year old. Yep. My problem is I would always fall asleep before we go because there was lots of whenever I was reading books it never got. I never got very far before I fell asleep and then the kids would be you know I think I can do.


S1: I think I could do where the Wild Things Are.


S12: I think you were there the night Max words were soon next week and were gone forever. All right. Bye everyone.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your slate plus membership.


S2: Hello, doctor, the Slate Political Gabfest for December 5th, twenty nineteen the badly written and received disaster edition.


S3: I did a lot about Scarra. I’m in Washington, D.C.. Joining me from New Haven, Connecticut, from the campus of Yale University and the mindspace of The New York Times magazine is Emily Bazelon. Hello, Emily.


S4: Oh, I like that division of my life. That was good. Thank you.


S5: And then back from back from somewhere. He just got back from somewhere. I don’t know where he’s been. Is John DICKERSON of CBS 60 Minutes. Hello, John. We haven’t seen you in a while.


S6: Hi. I know. I know. I think I’ll. I’m not going to tell you. But all the memory runs are a shade, so.


S7: Yeah, well, we’ll know soon enough. Whoa, whoa. I don’t want to scoops scoop myself, but I’m.


S8: I couldn’t be happier to be back. I’m sorry that the the international travel did not work out.


S9: So I’m happy to be back on today’s gabfest. The Judiciary Committee takes up the impeachment investigation. Where is that investigation going? Will the president be impeached before Christmas? Then Kamala Harris drops out of the presidential race. Why did such a promising campaign fall so hard, so fast? And what does it mean now that she’s out? And then we’ll talk to Ruth Marcus about Supreme Ambition, her new book about Brett Kavanaugh and his Supreme Court nomination and hearings and. Much more. And the conservative ambition to take over the courts. Plus, we’ll have cocktail chatter.


S10: Impeachment has stepped forward from the sexy theatrical fact gathering stage to the bazz Loni legal phase.


S4: So this week, the House God save us all.


S10: The House Intelligence Committee sent a report over to the House Judiciary Committee talking about what what the president is accused of doing and how that is impeachable. And the Judiciary Judiciary Committee held its first hearing on Wednesday about whether the president should be impeached with three constitutional scholars saying yay! And one constitutional scholar saying nay. So let’s consider this whole landscape. And let’s start with the import of the kind of facts in the report that the Intelligence Committee has gathered. John, the kind of fact gathering phase of this seems to be largely over. What in your mind is the the import of the report that was created in the end, the kind of some of this past month or so of public testimony is this has has a very strong, persuasive, clear case been made that the public has a handle on it and that Congress has a handle on the Republican position is all over the lot.


S11: Some people say he did nothing wrong. Other people say he did something wrong, but it’s not impeachable. That is still after 11 weeks, still up in the air. But in terms of the majority’s report, I mean, the basic claim here is the president abused his office. He used the powers of the office that are given to him for himself. Now, there is also the question of whether that can be defined as a bribe, which is helpful because the word bribery is in the actual constitution, which just draws you a little bit closer to the definition of treason, bribery or other high crimes and misdemeanors.


S8: And then there’s the question of obstruction of justice, particularly in with respect to saying basically he’s not going to answer any subpoena at all of Congress in any form. Does that amount to an end to an obstruction of justice? But the basic biggest thrust is the central question is whether he abused his power.


S7: So that’s I’ll stop there.


S10: Emily, there was all this legal testimony from various constitutional scholars. I’m sure all all cronies and buddies of yours. What do you think the import of that testimony, which was much less watched. And I think much less explosive certainly in the public presentation than the facts testimony of a few weeks ago.


S12: OK. So all four of them, including Jonathan Turley, who is the Republican’s expert, either forcefully said that the president’s conduct is impeachable or in Turley’s case, refused to say that it wasn’t. So that’s interesting. If you think that this a bribe or scheme or plot, a pressure campaign happened, then legal experts are saying like, yes, this is an impeachable offense. And I think you can also just think of it as like Trump is trying to steal the election. If he did this and that’s an abuse of power, that the system should have some way to reprimand and show is wrong. So that other people, including Trump, don’t do it in the future. The second question is one about process. And this is where Turley was really on Trump’s side in arguing that the process has been unfair to him, that it’s been too fast and that because it’s been too fast. We haven’t heard from key witnesses. I think there’s a really interesting question about speed. And we talked about this with Jamal last week, and Jamal kind of talked me into thinking like, yeah, they are moving too quickly. But that’s different from a question about fair due process. The obvious response to Turley’s point that Trump is being treated unfairly is that the witnesses who are missing Bolton, Pompeo, Mulvany, couple other people aren’t there because the White House is refusing to cooperate, is utterly preventing all the witnesses from complying with subpoenas, is refusing to turn over any documents. And so I just like I just literally don’t understand how you can say it’s deeply unfair that the public and Congress hasn’t heard from these key witnesses, deeply unfair to the president, who is the figure who is preventing all of this information from reaching Congress and the public. That just seems like just totally contradictory to me.


S13: Or you have to at least acknowledge that if you’re going to be saying this is moving too quickly. And also, by the way, the other reason is an argument. Another refutation of that argument about speed is. Well, first of all, a that’s a political point. It’s not a legal plane in terms of interpreting the Constitution. B, the rebuttal is it has to be adjudicated quickly, because what’s at issue here is, as you put it, trying to steal the next election. You’re gonna get that. You got that figured out because the election itself can’t be a remedy. Elect reelecting him or not re-electing him isn’t a proper sanction for some. Who’s trying to meddle in that future election?


S1: Right. And look, Giuliani is like flying off to Ukraine as we speak to go try to meet with these ousted prosecutors who claim to have evidence that would be helpful to Trump. I mean, it’s literally still happening.


S10: Yeah. One of the things that’s so troubling about this entire process is the kabuki ness of it, which I put 98 percent of the blame for on the Republicans who are I think are not in any sense being honest or distinguishing themselves in their public service, that they’re that their behavior is hypocritical and and cynical and entirely partisan.


S14: And if the shoe were on the other foot, they would be full of outrage. There. There’s no way in which they actually believe the bullshit that they’re saying about this president, about his behavior and whether this is legitimate for a president to do. But there is this way in which there’s this there’s this kind of state genius about where, you know, all these these elements and that it’s very grave and that impeachment is going to happen in this way when we all know what the outcome is. We all know the outcome is that he will be impeached by a you know, entirely, you know, all Democrats or all. But a couple will vote for it. No Republicans will vote for it. Then in the Senate, there will be a Senate trial, which will be highly theatrical and staged in such a way as to kind of try to embarrass Democrats because Republicans control it. And at the end of that, he will not be convicted. And so the I find that the kind of requisitioning of the founding fathers, the appeals to the Constitution. It’s obviously necessary. It’s obviously important. Like this is a process that is that is baked into the constitution. It’s the wet the remedy that we have. But the fact that this legislature is actually unable to carry out its duties in a responsible way because one party refuses to do it is so depressing. And it and it kind of makes the whole thing feel makes the whole thing feel stupid and pointless, which is totally.


S11: I just knew exactly what the president’s defenders would exactly how they would like you to react. So if the Republicans were brave in defending the president as he is himself, they would open by saying, look, he’s innocent. He wasn’t in town when the crime you’re saying was committed took place. He’s like, it’s open and shut case. Instead, they made they I’m ranking member Collins gave an entire opening statement, didn’t mention the word Ukraine, so that by talking about the process and all that. So the idea is that the way the best defense is to make this seem like a total morass and to tire everyone out, I. Now, that isn’t that doesn’t.


S10: Well, I’m not saying that. I’m not saying that. I think that’s a wrap. I’m saying that it feels because one party is acting in bad faith. It feels pointless. Yeah.


S12: Not that it’s not the no but that pointless. Think about history. It’s not pointless. But like what it’s when we look back at this in 25 or 50 years, do we want to think that the country turned a blind eye to this kind of behavior? Like do we want to think that there were no consequences? No. We want something on the record that this is unacceptable, something if you think it happened.


S11: So but so that’s from a tactical standpoint, they’re trying to get you to feel the way you are. David, even if so, that’s one thing. Secondly, Emily’s exactly right. The idea is that one is supposed to do one’s duty regardless of whether it seems boring or seems enervating or whatever. And going back to first principles, when the entire question here is whether the president lived up or fell short of the standard of his office, going back to figure out what the original standard of behavior was seems crucial, even though it means going back to the founders. We do it all the time. So that’s not that crazy. And then the other thing is you never know what comes up and what can be found in investigations. Lots of investigations seem pointless until they don’t. And because this taking place in an election year, this is outside of the formal duty they’re supposed to do as members of the of the House. But it’s a really useful thing to have an investigation for the purposes of exonerating the president or for the purposes of condemning him before he’s up for re-election about the way he does business. Does his short circuiting of the entire apparatus of foreign policy lead to better outcomes? And is it done for a good reason that’s consistent with American values? Or is are his short circuit things hiring his private lawyer to go basically to U.S. foreign policy? Is that a danger to the to the country’s super useful thing to have in an election year when you’re thinking about electing you guys are totally when you have no Justice Department investigation whatsoever?


S1: No, except the indictments of lab partners and that other guy eager for him.


S10: Of course, that’s what you guys are saying is, of course, absolutely right. And I and I you know, I am not. This is not making me sympathetic to President Trump in any sense and is not making me you know, it doesn’t make me deplore what the Democrats are doing it. It just makes me deeply deep. He said that without that, that one of the results of impeachment is an X is that it is exposed. And maybe this is what maybe this is what I’m so depressed about is exposed the rottenness of the American political system. We’ve looked in the foundation. The foundation is cracked. We have looked at the you know, the beams and the beams are riddled with termites. This system, which is supposed to be a buttress against demagogues, buttress against cynical people being personally corrupt and being bought by foreign powers. In fact, because because of how the system is broken down, it isn’t. And what the president is going to come out of this impeachment with, in my mind is likely no change in the underlying kind of political dynamics of the state of the country. And with a playbook about how you handle an attack on you and ways to continue to lie and mislead and cheat and suppress the ability of Congress and the courts to do anything about you so that the result is gonna be the ineffectuality is going to be shown. Yes. History will vindicate. Well, actually, history really won’t vindicate because history public enemy written by the horror show people who are who are currently in power. But hopefully history will one day vindicate this. But but that doesn’t that the system is going to be weaker in 2020 than it is in 2019, or at least it will see the weaknesses more visibly.


S1: Here’s one thought, historical thought to throw in here, which doesn’t really contradict your point, but is useful. And I’m now borrowing from my friend Beverly Gage, who’s a history professor at Yale. And one thing she has been pointing out to me is that Nixon’s resignation did not actually change the fundamental political dynamics either. Like it turned out that, you know, it didn’t take very long for the Republicans to come back into power. And the underlying concerns of the American electorate transcended the problems of corruption that were specific to Nixon. Now, you can argue that’s because he resigned and it was sort of like, you know, a boil that was lanced and that if the opposite happens now, we will have a different kind of return to the fundamental concerns that is much more troubling for the constitutional structure. But it is interesting to think that that was true then. And the country kind of continued and, you know, went on to a better era of governmental reform in the 1970s.


S11: I think if you’re a Republican and you’re hearing your your views, David, you would basically say, well, that’s what it felt like when when Bill Clinton was allowed to get away with what happened at that point. So. So I think so. That’s the first point. I think the second point is what’s what’s objectively different in this case than in the Clinton cases when Clinton is being impeached. His approval record was quite high and got higher. In this case, you do have Donald Trump, 70 percent. The country thinks he did something wrong, which I still think presents an interesting political question for Republicans. There are some Republicans who are in districts and in states where if 70 percent your voters think the president did something wrong, it’s politically risky for you to say, even recognizing the strength of the Republican base, for you to say his phone call was perfect. And so what? How will that tension manifest? His message manifest itself with various people. But I would say just one of it. So 70 percent think he did something wrong. And and the support for impeachment, whether it’s at 48, 49, 50 or 51, is higher than it was under Clinton or George W. Bush, who, by the way, we should all remember President Trump would asked for George W. Bush to be impeached for the for the Iraq war. And then the final point I would make is I think people felt a certain sense of despair that you feel, David, before the twenty eighteen elections and a lot of those people felt nothing’s going to change and the system is is a mess. Others worked to elect Democratic candidates, elected a bunch of them. They took control of the House. And now Democrats are doing things in the House that those people who felt so frustrated are happy to see happen. So with respect to progress, those people would feel progress had been made since 2017 by electing a house that could at least raise these questions and do other things. So even in our short rate, recent space of time, people who have felt the way you have got an outcome that that improve the system somewhat by having house the house go into Democratic hands.


S5: John, so it’s clear the house is on a fast track to get impeachment done to impeach the president before the end of the year and that there will be a Senate trial shortly thereafter. What for each party are the pros and cons of this pretty rapid approach?


S11: Well, the pros for Republicans is that it moves quickly and they just say, oh my gosh, it’s moving so fast. This isn’t being done in a serious way. You’ve been trying to railroad him from the beginning and it gives them a process, a series of process arguments they can make, which which allow them to not have to wrestle with this basic tension, which is did the president do anything wrong? And if he did a little something wrong, then that then once you pull that sweater thread, it creates a set of problems for them. You know, Democrats have a tricky problem here, which is that they’re trying to get this done quickly because, I mean, for a variety reasons, including the fact that a number of Democratic presidential candidates are gonna be stuck in the Senate, unable to talk and get out of their chair for January. And I think that Nancy Pelosi has always been worried that the country has a limited attention span for this, limited passion for this, and that she’s got a bunch of members in districts that are close who want to get back to the business of campaigning and talking about issues. So she wants to have been able to say we did a professional investigation. We voted more in sorrow than in anger. And then we got back to business. And the downside for them is that they that that takes too long. Basically, the president can say, I’m trying to do work here and Democrats are just, you know, getting in my way.


S9: Gabfests listeners, our annual conundrum show, it’s going to be live at the Fox Theater in Oakland, California, on December 18th. We are fired up to come to Oakland in a couple of weeks. We have a special guest, Adam Savage of Mythbusters is going to join us to solve conundrums for you. And there are still tickets available. Go to Slate, dot com slash live to get those tickets and you can still tweet conundrums to us. Use the hashtag conundrum at Slate Gabfest. We would love to see or conundrums. There’s so, so many good ones.


S15: John, I have they’re all gone through. Oh, you did. You went through them. So fun. Just so a couple we might we might or might not deal with.


S5: Would you rather lose your memory or all of your creativity? That’s a great question. How do you tell your best friend that the woman he introduced you to with the love of his life and his future wife appears to be a disaster waiting to happen? That is like such a real life problem. All of us face that. No idea what the right answer is, but maybe Adam Savage can can bust that myth. You can pick one member of the Beatles as your ally in the zombie apocalypse. Who do you pick? That is a crazy question. First of all, a bunch of the Beatles are dead. They’re probably already zombies. I wouldn’t even work.


S16: I mean, I’m interested in the question. I’m interested. But is that just like which members? I don’t know, you know. Do you like. I mean, I don’t know.


S6: Well, I know. But don’t don’t eat your seed corn anyway.


S5: Go to Slate dot coms less live. Get tickets for our Conundrum Show, December 18th in Oakland, California. Kamala Harris dropped out of the presidential race this week, months before the first voting. She is by far the highest profile candidate to leave the Democratic race, although she wasn’t even the only one who dropped out this week. Steve Bullock, the Montana governor, dropped out as well, leaving us with only.


S17: Oh, I didn’t know that. That’s about all right.


S9: There are only 10 to the 14th power number of candidates still running, though. Still plenty, plenty more to to to fall away. Harris had rocketed near the top of the polls several months ago with her attack on Joe Biden about busing in the first, I think, was the first Democratic debate, but has been sagging ever since. So so why, Emily, did she need to drop out and why did her campaign flag? I think those are two separate question. One is sort of a practical question, the other is like what went wrong with her message or her how she conveyed it?


S12: Well, she was running out of money. That was what she said. So there’s the answer to the practical question why did her campaign flag? I basically subscribe to the theory that it was never completely clear what she stood for and that there’s a kind of triangulating quality to her politics that proved a problem that she couldn’t really surmount. And I wasn’t particularly surprised by that when I was reporting on her when she was running for the Senate in California and 2016. I saw some of that. And I think there is something about politics for a lot of people that tends to feed that. And at the time, I was particularly aware that she was the attorney general of California. She was one of two black women elected to statewide office.


S1: And I think that challenge has kind of informed her approach to politics and the guardedness that and her kind of tendency to play it safe a little bit as a senator. She was a bolder liberal by far. Then when she was attorney general or district attorney in San Francisco. But as a presidential candidate, I just don’t think she like found her thing. I also think that there are some sexism and kind of latent skepticism about black candidates that was coming into play and that seemed to be affecting some of the people who might have been her supporters. I was really struck by this point that instead Herndon, who is a politics governor at The New York Times, made in a on the daily The New York Times podcast recently. He said he was talking to black male voters and they were skeptical about whether she could win and whether they wanted to support her. And that’s a small percentage of the whole. And that doesn’t excuse or like explain the white people who are flocking to people to judge, etc. But it did make me have some greater understanding of why Biden’s support with black voters has been so strong, even though Harris seemed like she should be a formidable alternative.


S14: John, I find her. I mean, I just have been confounded because she she’s almost like I’m trying to think of it. This is something from physics where she occupies every space all at once. Like she’s a woman, she’s progressive, she’s moderate, she’s a woman of color. Like she she was like so everywhere that she wasn’t anywhere in some ways. And this seems to be an electorate that really wants. They really want their candidates to be kind of really very well defined. And the that broadness that she represented came to be unclear and unhelpful. And I I I don’t. Yeah it’s you do feel like it running in nineteen ninety two about a black woman running 1:41. Probably problems but running and running in 2008, 2000, 16, that would have been a better space to be in.


S8: Well what you describe I believe is this is true that 538, when they looked at the candidates at the beginning of this race, did some Venn diagramming. And and she, I think, had the best Venn diagram in terms of capturing and ad to end having constituencies in all of the different groups that make up the Democratic coalition. And so by that measurement, they were they were bullish on her as a candidate who had at least had the upside opportunity to reach into all the different groups. We’re engaging in two things that we all recognize are really hard, a, trying to capture a moving picture of a dynamic race. Yes. Because who knows what the hell this race is. And nevertheless, candidates and voters and donors and all that have to kind of try and figure out what the race is. But we all recognize that this is a hard thing to do. And and then also a corollary to that or an offshoot of that is it’s very hard to tell what what really did a candidate. And I think having said all of that as a preamble, what Emily says, I mean, to be both a woman and a woman of color is those are tricky. Those are hard things in politics, even in a in a party that cares about or I should say doesn’t or says it doesn’t care about those issues as impediments to the office. One of the figures that the supports that I think is the polling that has shown the Democrats, when you ask them, would we do vote for a woman for president, they say, absolutely, I would. And then when asked if they think their neighbor would, who is also Democrat, they would say, oh, no, they wouldn’t. A lot of that informs the way in which people think about candidates who don’t fit, you know, the traditional or I guess quote unquote, traditional mold.


S1: And finally, the element of her record as a prosecutor didn’t help her in the way that it seemed like it could or should have. And I think part of what happened was that she just got dunked on on lefty Twitter and among young people, and she didn’t have a good answer to it. Like, I think she could have bounced back from that. But she overclaim tried to position herself as a progressive prosecutor, which she really wasn’t as a D.A. and or isn’t the attorney general. And I still feel like she could have just run on it and figured it out. But instead, they kind of froze. Which goes to the calculated, guarded, like not very nimble problem I think she has sometimes had.


S10: So the Harris fade or the Harris banishment and Elizabeth Warren’s recent struggles suggest a retreat from women candidates in the race and of course, club, which are also not doing well. Tulsi Gabbard not at the top anywhere. And there’s this seems to be the sense. I don’t know how to describe it except as a polling sense that Democrats feel they need to stick with a good old white guy, even if in Mayor Pete’s case, the good old white guy is young and gay and inexperienced, that’s still safer than a woman. What is up with that? Emily, RMI overreading it. I mean, I don’t know. I don’t think you’re overeating. I mean, just let let me put phrases a different way. I’m agitating myself as somebody who does not wish for Joe Biden or Bernie Sanders to be the Democratic nominee. I’m very agitated by their continuing strength. Should I be agitated, John? Or is it? Is there any chance like this, this this kind of retreat to the white guy will fade?


S6: Best to ask this of the white guy. I think you have some other white guy. You. I think you have some intersectionality and some challenges here which are hard to pull apart. Bernie Sanders has a committed, devoted following that is impenetrable. And is Bernie Sanders specific. And so that’s a kind of you got him locked in around that which which doesn’t necessarily have to be people of ascribed various things to that group. But it that’s a kind of pro Bernie group that’s going to stick with him till the end. Then with Biden, you have some electability power there.


S8: He was at 49 percent in our CBS. His last poll in African-Americans, 49 percent support. The closest I think was was maybe Harris and she was 34 points away. So to the extent that Harrison Booker Booker was just quite slightly behind Harris, they were both making the case with African-Americans that essentially you need somebody who’s gonna be able to advocate for African-American views. But even in their own party, African-Americans liked something about Joe Biden more than them. So what’s my point? My point is that electability there or familiarity or connection to Obama or something is putting Biden in the first position with those voters and not identity, age, color or any of those issues. And then with Bhuta George, I think you have a you could potentially have an a a kind of fleed or moderation from people who worry that with Sanders and Warren in the initial kind of heavy lift way that this race got out of the gate, that that’s where some of that is kind of the moderate energy of the party is going.


S13: So I guess my point is that there are other factors at play here, and I don’t know the amplitude of those of those factors. In answering your question, David, which is is the obvious one, though, which is that basically it looks like a white field here at the end.


S1: I mean, one way to think about this is that Biden and Buddah judge are standing on the policy ground. That’s the most popular like it’s not crazy. I think that that makes them more electable, particularly on their health care policy answers. I also shout out to our question, I guess, about Biden’s new ad about Trump being laughed at around the world, which I thought was quite effective. And I found it such a relief to have a Democrat taking straight aim at the Republican opponent and kind of leapfrogging ahead to the general election. And in that context, like looking like a strong alternative. I worry about Joe Biden’s propensity to self-destruct, though, you know, as I think I mentioned last week, now that I’m thinking of him as having a stuttering problem, I feel more generous still. I don’t know. David, is that when you say that you really don’t want him to be the candidate? Are you worried that he’s gonna blow it or do you think he’d be about president?


S10: I think there’s a high likelihood that he would blow it. I think he is. You know, he is prone to gaffes. I think clearly age is wearing on him. But more importantly, I think he would be. A bad president for the future of the Democratic Party. I think he doesn’t come with ideas. He is. He is. He will. He would be extremely lackluster. I think Republicans, he would not bring a kind of aggressive, enthusiastic, buoyant agenda to the presidency that would galvanize Democrats and would would carry forth for years to come. Whereas I think the other candidates. I mean, all of the other top candidates, including Sanders. But Sanders, but a judge and Warren would bring it dynamism and energy that would galvanize the Democratic Party and make it a stronger, more effective party. Overall, I think there there was a piece maybe a couple of months ago where someone was writing about the problem with Biden is that he could win the presidency and that would be great. And I would, of course, vote for him 100 times out of 100 against against Donald Trump. But that the Democrat that it’s very likely the Democrats would have a huge electoral set of losses in the years to come afterwards because he he could not hold the party together, make it a meaningful and energetic party. That’s my real concern.


S1: What if he’s more for the future? What if you pick someone like.


S10: I don’t even ever want to hear anybody say who their running mate is. It makes no difference. Nobody cares about anyone’s running mate. Their running mate doesn’t set the agenda. The running mate doesn’t define the party. None of that matters. The president matters. The running mate doesn’t matter, right, John?


S13: Well, only if you’re Lyndon Johnson and John Kennedy in 92, in 1960, which is to say, yes, you’re right. But there is you. You you can’t say never, but. But basically. Yeah. And and obviously in these times of polarization and partisanship, it would be even less likely to help.


S5: Slate plus members, you get bonus segments on the gab fest and on other Slate podcasts, those other ones which are also totally solid, good, often great if you go to slaked complex gabfests. Plus you can join today, become a member today and you will get this bonus segment we are going to definitively answer. Finally, answer the question of whether it is better to give or to receive. I know you’ve been wondering about that as you’ve been planning your your holiday season, perhaps buying presence or anticipating the presence you’re going to get. Now you’re going into the right answer, but whether you should plan on giving more or receiving more.


S14: We are joined today by beloved gabfests regular Ruth Marcus of The Washington Post as teased repeatedly on previous Gabfest episodes. Ruth has a new book out. It’s called Supreme Ambition. Brett Kavanaugh, the conservative Takeover Tarty been reviewed widely and brilliantly. It’s been reviewed, in fact, by the president himself. Ruth Marcus book. He tweeted is a badly written and researched. That’s him. Research disaster. So many incorrect facts. Fake news, just like The Washington Post. Congratulations on that five star review, Ruth. So I have two opening questions. One, did that tweet do anything for sales? And two, why did your book get under the president’s skin?


S18: Well, it’s very interesting that the book got under the president’s skin because at the time he declared it badly written and received it was actually not yet publicly available for him not to read. But and it’s also was also a surprise that it got under his skin, because in a sense, the book is about Donald Trump’s greatest triumph, which is his ability to reshape the federal judiciary generally and to finally achieve the conservative dream of seizing control pretty firmly of the Supreme Court. So I think he should have embraced it. But it did help with some sales. And I was particularly struck by his use of the word received because I thought it rhymed with something that might have been on the president’s mind bleached.


S10: OK. Teached Beach.


S19: I have a question, Ruth, about your wonderful opening, which which really is both fun to read and regulatory. You report that Justice Kennedy, when Neil Gorsuch was retiring in 2017, requested a private meeting with the president so that she could put forward Brett Kavanaugh as a future nominee if Kennedy himself retired.


S20: So, I mean, first of all, this is such an interesting bit of reporting. And second of all, like, what do we make of this? Is this perfectly fine that Kennedy is making this suggestion like he? Why not? Or do we think there’s something squirrelly about a justice?


S4: Is there something sort of quid quid pro quo? A-ha. Thought we had gotten rid of that word.


S20: Yeah, well, it does feel like a trade that essentially Kennedy is suggesting implicitly. And I’m sure not explicitly. Huh.


S19: Maybe you should consider another former clerk of mine since Gorsuch and Kavanaugh both clerked for Kennedy, and maybe that will make me more amenable to stepping down.


S18: Well, a really great question and really great point. And before I answer it, I want to actually share with the gabfests audience that gabfests. I’m so pleased to be here in part because actually being a gab fest irregular was extremely helpful in the production of this book because there was more than one person who I called up, some of whom were not necessarily inclined to talk to me, who said I wouldn’t talk to you.


S4: But I hear you on gabfests. And I would say something like, I think that John DICKERSON or I think that Emily Bazelon is really smart to talk like this. So thank you, Gabfests.


S16: Why the wise listener crashing down a bomb?


S4: I now I’m in trouble and all the hard questions are coming, OK, about the Kennedy intervention.


S18: It was a really, really interesting moment from the White House point of view, as you suggest, Emily. They desperately, desperately, desperately wanted to secure Justice Kennedy’s nomination and would do really whatever it took to make him comfortable in thinking that if he stepped down, his seat would be in capable and responsible hands. And so one way they did that was by nominating Justice Gorsuch, who had been a clerk, but not quite a favorite clerk of Justice Kennedy’s. Then comes the Gorsuch swearing in. Justice Kennedy asks for a few moments with the president, and he mentioned, hey, there is somebody who’s not on your Supreme Court list, who’s a former clerk of mine, who you should really consider this guy, Brett Kavanaugh, who, of course, the president had heard of and had refused to have on his list, primarily because he was viewed by the president as a Bushie judge cabinet. Now, Justice Kavanaugh had not only worked for President George W. Bush, had not only been nominated to the federal bench by George W. Bush, but he had actually married George W. Bush’s secretary, who was something like a surrogate daughter to the Bushes. So he was the ultimate Bushie swamp creature. And Trump really didn’t want to have any of it. But once Justice Kennedy made the suggestion, once they were really eager to get Justice Kennedy dislodged from that seat so they could fill it with their own person. The president started to say, hey, who’s this? Brett Kavanaugh, a guy. Lo and behold, justice. Few months after that, Brett Kavanaugh’s name turns up on a list yes, unveiled on the very day of a Federalist Society convention in November.


S11: Just on the ON THE LIST point, we explain to people why that was so notable. With respect to the timing and also the the people on the list relative to what Republicans had done in the past. When asked during the campaign, you know, the kind of person they would elect to the Supreme Court and why that was so important for Trump.


S18: The thinking was and the president had obviously been thinking about it and raising it with people beforehand. Then candidate to do this very unusual thing of coming up with a list, because it was a list and only a list that was public that would really satisfy social conservative evangelical voters that they could trust. This thrice divorced once abortion rights supporting New York former Democrat named Donald Trump with the incredible power of filling a Supreme Court seat as Trump thrice divorced, thrice married to Ruth.


S5: When I think back on Brett Cabinet and his appearance on the Supreme Court, the number one thing I think about, of course, is Christine Bobby Ford. And there was it was extraordinary hearings. And when was that? 2018.


S18: It was the fall of followed when 18 was on September 27, 2013. Yes.


S9: So looking back at that, what is your sense about why after this incredibly persuasive testimony from from Christine Bothy Ford about a sexual assault that she said Brett Kavanaugh committed against her? Why did Kavanaugh survive and pass through so easily?


S18: Well, not entirely. I don’t think he would call it easily. I think he would call it painfully. But he he got through with a vote or two to spare. I think the answer to the question is very clear, and it’s really embodied in the title of this book. It’s called Supreme Ambition, not just because it’s about Brett Kavanaugh’s ambition, which really appeared at a remarkably young age shortly after he graduated from law school. That’s his ambition. But the book is about a greater ambition, which is the thwarted for 30 years ambition that goes back to the failed nomination of Robert Bork, goes back to the somewhat significant disappointment that Bork’s eventual replacement, Justice Kennedy, was for conservatives, to the huge disappointment that Justice Souter was named by George H.W. Bush for conservatives and the conservative determination that these gaffes of the past, that the moments that they had squandered would not be repeated again. And so that this was their moment to finally get the fifth vote on the court. They were. They were absolutely determined that it would not be denied them. And so when Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination ran into trouble, that might have led a different president or a different Senate in a different time to abandon him and look for an alternative. They were going to do what he took because as Chuck Grassley’s chief nominations counsel told me, Kavanaugh had become too big to fail.


S12: It seems to me that there is a connection between the ambition you’re talking about for Kavanaugh’s nomination and the too big to fail. And Mitch McConnell’s, you know, genius play to stop Merrick Garland, President Obama’s nominee for Scalia’s seat, like just this recognition, increasingly powerful in the Republican Party, that these norms and niceties that have allowed the American government to function and had some bipartisan support are just like not worth it. Voters don’t care about them. They’re not going to stop Republicans from winning elections. And so, like, we’re just going to ram our people and our goals through. I mean, is that part of what was going on here?


S18: I think it’s absolutely part of what was going on here. And I think it has its current day still unfolding analogue really in the impeachment proceedings, where there’s not a lot of willingness on the part of Republicans to grapple with the significance and seriousness of the underlying facts and to have a debate on the merits about what does and does not, if anything, does ever rise to the level of a high crime and misdemeanor. Mitch McConnell is a very important figure in this whole story because he is the what he is actually behind the scenes pushing Trump to come out with the darn list already because he knew it was going to be a motivating force for his voters. And the thing that he cares about the most is maintaining his Senate majority. So it’s this ruthlessness that we saw. Both with the. I’m going to call it theft of Merrick Garland seat on the Supreme Court. And with getting Cavin across the finish line, I think it’s important to understand the mindset on the other side, which is Republicans and conservatives will look at and they’ll look back to the Anita Hill Clarence Thomas hearings and the last minute nature of those allegations. They’ll look to the last minute nature of how the Christine Blousy fought allegations against Justice kavanagh’s surfaced. And they will say, as Brett Kavanaugh did in that incredibly volcanic testimony, that this was a partisan smear campaign. And in the end, Democrats would do whatever it took to try to stop him. So there is a conviction on both sides that the other side is ruthless. I think it’s completely correct that both sides would try to do what it takes to achieve their aim. The reality is, is that Republicans, after having lost Bork, have just gotten so much better at it than Democrats have. And I think have assembled the architecture through Leonard Leo, the Federalist Society, and the incredible sums of money that he’s able to generate in support of these judicial nominees. They just have the architecture and the funding to get the job done.


S5: Ruth Marcus, this book is Supreme Ambition. Brett Cabinet, The Conservative Takeover Get it an annoyed president. Trump Get it and delight yourself. Ruth Thanks for doing so by the book.


S14: Let’s go to cocktail chatter. When you are having a beer with Brett Kavanaugh.


S5: As you might say, he apparently did. Back in the day, what are you gonna be chattering about? John DICKERSON.


S6: Mind chatter is is about this lovely New York Times feature on the New York subway map.


S13: If you live in New York, the New York subway is a subject of some disappointment to you in your daily in your daily efforts.


S21: I know you do appreciate it as being so much better. Hashtag back off. Transportations. Yes, exactly.


S13: I do well in New York, but I always feel it seems since fitting in this in the ethos of the gab fest that the two non New Yorkers are weighing in on the New York subway system.


S14: Hard. I work both part time New Yorkers so well to back off anyway.


S6: What I would like to do is is celebrate The New York Times subway map, which The New York Times has this great feature, which I encourage people to to look at on the Web, but also on your mobile device because they’ve optimized this and you it’s the story of the redesign of the map in 1979 of iconic New York subway map. And my favorite little fact about it beautifully displayed in this in this feature is that when they redesigned it, the principal redesign or whose name I’m gonna butcher, but is, I think, Nobuyuki so racy. Sorosky, who is a sculptor and a painter in making the redesign of the map. One of the things they found, the old map, is that straight lines were irritating to people and confusing. And so what he did was he rode the subways with his eyes closed, all lines beginning to end road the entire thing with his eyes closed in order to create this map that we all now know so well.


S1: And wait, I don’t get this at all. How do you make a map when your eyes are closed? What are you talking about?


S22: So it’s not that wasn’t all he did. There was like a second step. It was just. And in a napkin with mustard stains from Coney Island and like his pan. But in order to get a feel for the rhythm and movement of the subway lines, he rode them with his eyes closed. And then it sort of drew the feeling of the of the curve.


S13: He felt the curve and then he felt the curve.


S21: Why? He felt the bell. Yeah. So he felt that.


S6: Thank you. David, are you sure you were in the New York subways? And so anyway, that that that feeling of the curve, that feeling of being in the in the subway informed his graphic design of the New York subway map, which now helps people get through the city as best they can.


S10: You know what the most here’s the most amazing fact to me about the New York subway map. But in all New York maps in general, like look at the New York subway map. What like when you look at Manhattan, what’s Manhattan is straight up and down, right? Sure. Right.


S14: So you look at. Yeah, so so. And also in the top Manhattan, it’s long but so it Manhattan you would say. Emily. Oh pose this to you. Goes north. South. Right. Uh-Huh. Manhattan does not go due north and south at all. Manhattan has like a 15 degree tilt that it’s more like it. You know, 130. It goes for more like 730 to 130. But every once in the maps are all pointed to make it look like it goes from 12:00 to 6:00, because that’s how people orient.


S17: And yet that’s not me. It makes you think that way.


S14: And the grid makes you think that way. And yet it’s not. And then when you realize like, oh, wait, that’s not north where I’m going, it’s I’m going northeast.


S13: Well, and once you get down into lower Manhattan, I mean, it’s just a mess and you get lost if you’re me.


S15: So those of us who are MIT navigate pigeon like with magnetic north are constantly confused. Emily Watts, who is that person I’d navigate very much by by absolute direction? Like that’s how I if I somehow where the sun is, is how I feel, where things are. Huh?


S17: When you’re so much better at it than I am, of course, everyone in the entire world does better than navigating than I am. All right. What’s your chatter, Emily?


S19: My chatter is about this story in The Washington Post about the Statue of Liberty and its origins involving a celebration, an aneffort by the French to celebrate the freeing of slaves as opposed to the welcoming of immigrants. This is a revelation to me. Turns out the story is from last May, but it only appeared in my social media feed this week. And it’s a story from the Museum of the Statue of Liberty, which is reviving this aspect of the statue’s history. And I never noticed this before, but there are these broken chains under the foot of. Lady Liberty and actually the in the original design, she would have been holding the broken chains in one of her hands and then maybe we wouldn’t have lost sight of this really interesting origin story. And, you know, it just it’s I’m happy to continue to celebrate. The Statue of Liberty is welcoming immigrants, but it turns out the statue was erected six years before Ellis Island started being the processing center for those immigrants. And there was just this alternative rationale for it. The other fascinating part of the story is that by the time it was completed, African-American newspapers were actually editorializing around the celebration because by then, of course, the betrayal of the end of reconstruction had come. And they did not want America to be let off the hook for the way in which the failure to, you know, really make freedom mean what it should have meant to.


S9: Doesn’t the poem, the Emma Goldman poem with added much later, right?


S17: Yeah. 2:41, I think.


S5: Cool. My chatter is that depressing chatter. It is about the story that was set of stories that ran this week about death rates in the United States and the fact that young people or people in middle, young and middle age are dying more than they should be and that U.S. life expectancies are flat and not certainly not rising in the way that they are elsewhere in the world because of it. And that you see, because of suicide, because of gun deaths, because of drug deaths, obesity, diseases of despair, despair and poverty. People are dying in shocking rates, and there’s an interesting Paul Krugman column this week which points out that this is a this is politically divided, that if you look at richer, bluer city urban areas, life expectancy tends to be rising because education rates are higher because of Medicaid expansion, because of stronger social support networks, and that red areas tend to be seen the opposite that it and red areas. We’re seeing life expectancy declines in blue areas. Pretending to see life expectancy rises. And it’s bad news. It’s bad news for the world’s bad news for the country. It’s bad news for these tens of thousands of people who are dying younger and sadder and then more awful ways than they should be otherwise. Listeners, you continue to send us great chatters. Please keep them coming. There are so many good ones. There’s somebody who recommended that wonderful New York Times story at any even nine, including this The New York Times story about the prince of this royal family that was living in a in a palace in Delhi in a kind of decrepit palace in Delhi.


S19: My God, Ellen Barry’s crazy, amazing.


S10: Ellen Barry is the greatest. Ellen Barry is such an incredible writer. I’ve been following her. I mean, I interviewed her for jobs over the years and just like always tried to hire her. But my God, she’s a good reporter and finds most amazing stories.


S5: But that story you should check out about this, this family that was living in a palace in Delhi and, you know, claimed to be the princes of a of a. Another state in India. And it’s just crazy story anyway. But the listeners chattering uses from Kathleen bartends at at Kathy bartends. I hope I’m pronouncing your name right, Kathy. And it’s about Jonah Larson. And Jonah Larsson is a knitter or he’s a cross share. What’s the difference being crocheting and knitting?


S17: Oh, everything OK? Well, Monty, when we want to stop, we stop thinking that a different stitch, a different motion. OK.


S14: So Jonah Larson is an 11 year old who has been crocheting since he was 5 years old and he has ADHD and he used crocheting to kind of keep focus. And it kept him out of trouble in school. And it’s he’s become this Instagram icon, this person who is gives talks about his crocheting, who’s selling lots of stuff. And just a lovely story about a kid who has developed an unlikely interest and likely habit. And it’s and is inspiring lots of other people to take up crocheting and maybe even knitting as well. Who knows?


S1: Yes. Can I second this? This is how I survived listening to lectures in law school. Was there knitting? Because I also have so much trouble sitting still and focusing when I’m trying to listen. It’s really, really helpful.


S5: I wonder if you are somebody who knits or crochet as well. Listen to the podcast. Drop us in.


S3: That is our show for day. The gabfest is produced by Josslyn Frank. Researchers Bridget Dunlap, Melissa Kaplan helped in D.C. with Hales and Allen Pang in New York. Ryan McAvoy in New Haven. So many helpers everywhere. Everywhere. Gabriel Roth is our editorial director. June Thomas at the mentioned producer Slate podcast. You should follow us on Twitter at Slate Gabfests and tweet your chatter to us there. And please come to our live show on December 18th at in Oakland, second-to-last live. For tickets at the Fox Theater. We look forward to seeing you there for Emily Bazelon, John DICKERSON, I am David Plotz. Thanks for listening.


S2: We’ll talk to you next week.


S5: Hello. Slate plus. How are you? I personally spent a bunch of time buying president this weekend, not actually going anywhere, but just going online and rapidly running through my list of ideas and then coming up with worse ideas. And this is the season where you you have to if you are somebody who celebrates Christmas or Hanukkah or maybe other holidays, you end up getting some presence, giving some presence. And the question is, is it better to give or to receive people’s line is it’s better to give. And there is this is a cliche that you feel better when you give something to somebody and it’s more satisfying, whereas receiving a gift is, you know, it’s temporary. It’s but the object is not enough. So something we have chosen for yourself. And it doesn’t it just doesn’t have as durable a warm feeling as giving a gift does and doesn’t make you doesn’t fire the the satisfying, moralistic, self-righteous neurons in your brain that come from from giving a gift to somebody. So, Emily, better to give or receive.


S1: I still think it’s better to give. I’m gonna confess that I find the exchange of presents to be kind of excruciating and which is why you’ve never let your children get them on their birthdays.


S17: Exactly. They still are angry about that.


S1: Resentful. But I just I I’m sure this is just my own character failing. It’s so fraught with potential disappointment. I feel a lot of anxiety about being able to find for anyone something that they might actually want as opposed to like my idea of what they might want. And then when you are not sure and you’re giving it. That always makes me worried. But I would pick giving over receiving any day because I feel like the it’s I it’s hard even when someone gives me a gift. I do indeed. Like I feel like it’s hard to convey that in a genuine way. And it’s all just like fraught for me in a way that I feel kind of humiliated by John.


S11: Well, first of all, you framed it in such an unappealing way to say that the eyes light up.


S21: That’s my specialty. It’s John Reid.


S13: Well, the most righteous to be to be, you know, happy or in other people’s happiness.


S6: The good gift giving is a is such a talent. And the people who have it, you can tell, are curating and are I mean, they’re basically alive and sensitive to the people around them and the things that would truly delight them, which requires a really, you know, attentive mind to to be on on the ball. I have a friend who is incredibly good at gift giving. And I actually have a I’m the 3v3 nature wife who’s really good at gift giving. She is she is very good at gift giving. And and and in so anyway. So that that’s a skill I wish I had. And so that’s one that’s just one random thought. But while I generally believe that it is so much better and particularly depending on, you know, family members or someone you really love getting them something that you that hits that mark is a is a. I mean, it’s a rare joy that. However, having said that, going back to my wife throughout our long 30 almost year relationship, the like, the first gift I can think that she got me is that when we were in college, I would drink gas station coffee. There was a gas station near us, or I suppose maybe I made it and whatever disastrous coffeemaker we had in our house. And she went to a coffee place and got some coffee beans that were like better on your stomach than the than the basically kerosene that I was drinking from the gas station and that because I was drinking lots of coffee, staying up all night. And so that was like the first gift. And then she has given me sort of coffee related gifts at one reason or one way or another in 30 years. One of them was the Arab press, which I’ve had now for, I don’t know, 10, 15 years. So that Arab press every day, I am reminded of that just absolute perfect gift. And, you know, so that is a way in which you give that. I was I received it still pays off over time, not just in that I have nice coffee every day, but that that a little tiny bit of that that wonder or that thoughtfulness, I guess is really what I mean is in each cup of coffee.


S7: So I’ll stow my self-righteousness and in liking to give gifts and indulge in that little bit of self love.


S10: That’s a lovely story. The and I just want to align myself with that sense of the people who can give really thoughtful gifts that are remarkable. And my daughter actually is an incredible gift giver. I think it’s because she is a very close observer of people and just picks up on small clues that lead her to make great decisions. She’s very thoughtful about it. So huzzah to you. Child, I would say here, here, John has sort of gotten to a fundamental truth, which is that so people like to give gifts like they do feel better giving gifts. Right. And it actually, in general makes you feel better to give a gift that is a well studied phenomenon.


S23: Given that given that isn’t the best gift you can give is to be a generous recipient of other people’s gifts, that what you should be is somebody who is like so appreciative of gifts that people give you because they are giving you. They’re getting huge psychic satisfaction by giving you gifts. And you can magnify that satisfaction by being genuinely appreciative. So you the most altruistic thing that you can do is give people a chance to give you gifts that you’ll like. And so it’s better to receive gifts because you’re giving other people a chance to be happier.


S10: That’s the true altruism, is to give other people a chance to be happier by letting them give you gifts that will be valuable.


S6: That’s very persuasive. That is very well done. Very, very well done. And and I hesitate to say anything because it’s such so perfectly said. However, boy, there is that moment sometimes when you get a gift and I ask you open it and and it requires every ounce of of. I remember one year my mother told everybody my brother wanted picture frames. And so he got like sixteen different picture frames that year from people because she told every individual person. And so when he got to a picture frame twelve, he he just couldn’t summon any more work anymore. giggy any more gratitude and the picture frame. Yeah, exactly.


S12: What do you guys think about Yanqui swaps and all of this?


S16: So Mike, I don’t even know what this is. I don’t even know what this is. A definite basilone like another way to not give to my children. Oh, definitely about one way. They’re not giving land to children. Definitely. It’s different. How did you start your children this time?


S1: No, no. This is something. I’ve only done it like friends of Mine’s Houses in Vermont. I think of it as like super wasp. I mean, it’s called a Yankee Swap. I don’t know. Just kidding.


S20: In any case, a Yankee swap. Everybody brings a gift. And then you pick one out. They’re wrapped. I mean, the one at the time I did it. And you unwrap it and then you can trade.


S4: So the horror of it is that the gift that you put into the pile is one that nobody wants. It is like getting traded around the circle. But the wonderful thing about it is that you end up with something, hopefully that you want more rather than less.


S1: And so does everyone else. And it has this like lovely utilitarian flavor.


S22: But it has my personal.


S10: It’s not. There’s no human brain.


S1: It’s sort of like group personal as opposed to individual person, you know.


S6: Which is why the Yankee Swap often leads to never mind the.


S22: It seems to me that that’s just a host of terrible outcomes. There’s the.


S6: You already identified, which is that you pick a gift and everybody is trying to shuck it to the gift that you open is when you want to keep. And then you have. And then you kind of cling to it and won’t let anybody.


S21: You don’t have to trade it. I know.


S22: But then that replaces the joyous moment of gift giving with one of like suppressed rage and passive aggressive cause. You got a salad spinner that I’ve most kindle in my heart, a desire for. So that’s a that’s a big problem.


S6: And then and then you feel bad for being miserly with the salad spinner. But then the other person who’s who’s stuck with the whatever the soup spoon or whatever they got stuck with is bombed. It seems like a recipe for bumping everyone out, huh?


S17: All right. Well, I’ve only done it a couple of times, so I don’t have enough evidence.


S16: Emily, open the salad spinner. That’s definitely. What do you say? I’ve definitely got conference held dinners.


S4: I feel that you can just like dry your lettuce off with paper towels or regular towels. Anyway, I’m with you.


S14: All right. Slate plus. That was a. You got some good content there today.


S16: I was being sarcastic. No, I’ve been totally serious.


S14: This is probably one of the most popular slate plus segments we’d ever done. We’ve solved everyone’s gift-giving problems, calculators, slate plus.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership. The following podcast contains explicit language.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for November 22nd 2018.


S3: The sealed indictment edition I just realized today is the fifty fifth anniversary of the Kennedy assassination or the day that the show comes out of the fifty fifth anniversary.


S4: So I am David Plotz That was Obscura. I’m in Washington D.C. My co-host Emily Bazelon of the New York Times and John Dickerson of CBS This Morning are both in New York. Hello guys. Happy Thanksgiving.


S5: Okay. Happy Thanksgiving.


S6: We’re taping on Tuesday so who knows what could possibly happen between now and when you hear this which I hope is not during Thanksgiving but maybe a little bit before or a little bit after Thanksgiving or heck maybe some families have podcast listening over Thanksgiving maybe it could save you you know having a podcast to tune out to that is a good point. That’s


S7: right. We could be an island of tranquility or like a bouncy castle of fun.


S8: I always think of us as if that is possible. That’s really what our dog guides as far as t shirt should say.


S6: As you can see we’ve got a little pre holiday joy and boisterous ness. We’ve all been sitting here chit chatting but they’re serious business to attend to so we’re gonna talk about what is going on with the Mueller investigation. Then we’re going to talk about the California wildfires what they portend about life in the next century and what they pretend about life under drastically changed climate. Then is Facebook evil or just self delusional or are they near any. Are there any other choices. We will discuss. Plus we’ll have cocktail chatter of course. And a reminder that coming up soon soon after Thanksgiving we have our conundrum live show at the scribble Center at NYU in Manhattan on December 12th the Wednesday some tickets still left it’s like dot com slash live. Simon Doonan the delightful Simon Doonan will be our guest for some of that show. And the conundrum show of course is a chance to discuss the really tough issues they’re really complicated moral questions and and life questions that you’ve been grappling with so you should send us your conundrums first of all by tweeting them to us at Slate gabfest or emailing them to us and get a festive Slate column if you want some privacy on them. And we notice someone some great listener sent around a John Adams conundrum.


S8: Did you guys see that I love that one. I love Fallon. Yeah so many different reasons. But yeah so let’s save that one.


S9: No but let’s show a preview we won’t. Okay.


S10: But it was John Adams writing a letter to Thomas Jefferson asking the question which is what you were taught by.


S11: Yeah. Would you rather be attacked by a duck. Sighs George the Third or a thousand ducks called George. This


S12: hurt. Sorry go ahead.


S10: Yeah I think. Yeah it probably would have been. It would be a hundred Hustle has these five Hessian sized ducks or one duck sized Hessian. No it was a letter from John Adams to Thomas Jefferson and it was asking sort of would you want to live a life where every bit of pleasure is offset by a an equal bit of pain. Is that big fair like you get a million a million bits of great pleasure.


S6: But in return you must suffer a million doses of pain of agony that is just as painful as the pleasure is pleasurable. Interesting question. But I love the idea that the conundrum conundrum is a form that predates even us even our ancient show. There are conundrums long before us so we will grapple with John Adams conundrum but please come play dot com slash line to get tickets December 12th in New York.


S10: The Mueller investigation fell quiet for some weeks in the run up to the election still quiet. But wiser heads than I say there are signs there omens are portents. There are tea leaves their entrails to be read.


S6: That special prosecutor Robert Mueller is preparing to unveil a series of indictments in the Russia investigation. EMILY What. What is the what is the evidence. Why is this more than just like you know reading a feather that fell from the wing of a golf flying over the temple of Athena.


S13: I think it’s just wishful thinking on the part of many people who are more than ready for Mueller to make his move. Whatever it may be. So some of the tea leaves being read were just like Donald Trump’s apparent foul mood last week which doesn’t seem to me like enormously differentiated piece of evidence. But it was out there and he started tweeting in criticism of Mueller and denying that his choice for acting attorney general Matt Whitaker that he’d had known anything about Whitaker’s views of the Mueller investigation which seems odd since Whitaker had given interviews and written and talked about his use. So that was a little strange. And what else. Then there are all these like secret court filings going on in the courts in the District of Columbia that have been of course people are speculating they’re tied to Mueller. They’re not as some of them are from the Mueller team. But we don’t know who they relate to.


S6: We know that some of them are from the Miller team.


S14: Yeah I think we do know that part. We just don’t know who they’re about. So there was a lot of speculation that some of it might be subpoenaing Trump trying to get Trump to testify. But then other prosecutors I was talking to said no I don’t think that said it could be something else. So I think there’s just a lot of desire for action. And then I guess I left out an important thing which is that a few people. ROGER STONE Although he said he was expected to be indicted a while ago. Then there’s that friend of his Jerome Corsi. Jerome Corsi guy and then the most I would say salacious details that Don Junior has been telling his friends that he might get indicted. Now I have no idea if that’s true or not but I mean of course that is something that the media would gobble up and a wait for with bated breath because it would be a very big deal obviously.


S15: The one thing I have just a couple of things I would add is the foul mood was that yeah he was specifically targeting Muller mile high heat so the president is tweeted 50 times about Mueller and the Russia investigation. Does that seem like a lot or a little do you think a lot. Yeah well I mean it’s a lot. Not zero.


S14: Every time he potentially gets himself in trouble also he hadn’t done it for a couple months. Right. So it was like a return to form.


S11: Right. So that’s just what I. Exactly. That’s because that question seems to be touches on the larger Norm shifting question of the presidency which is he the the number should be zero and yet 50 I thought Oh well that’s not as much as I thought because you think that he is constantly agitating about how this is a witch hunt. But another feeling sorry John and you know the other.


S16: The other thing is that the in the Rick Gates the campaign deputy manager and then Manafort there were court filings in which the special counsel said don’t sentence them yet because they’re still providing as active information it will delay.


S14: Right. Suggestive delay is like oh maybe they don’t want to. The government doesn’t want to show its hand yet. And then the other report is that Trump’s lawyers are almost finishing and almost finished answering the written questions. And so that suggests that’s been a long outstanding item on Mueller’s checklist.


S7: So explain. Explain the don’t show the hands part because what I thought was that they were delaying the sentencing of Manafort and gage because they were still actively engaged did they claim that they were still actively helping with the investigation which made me think they’re like two clocks here. There’s the indictments that have already been sealed and I want you to explain that do you do that to seal indictments so that let’s say Whittaker comes in and fires Mueller the indictments are sealed loaded and ready to go. So even if the fires and they still go off.


S14: Right. And it means that. Exactly. There could. What it means is that there could be indictments that have already had they’re already in the hands of a judge that we don’t know about.


S10: But that’s not the only reason why you feel an indictment.


S5: A lot of other things might be relevant to it. Yes. No presumably that’s not the actual not the proffered. But what are the real reason.


S16: Yeah. What


S14: what are the other reasons you would do rather than having Mueller having the fear that you might get with Julian Assange who is not being pursued by the Mueller team I should make clear that’s a separate indictment from the Eastern District of New York. Presumably it was because they were trying to get him extradited or trying to go get him in some way and they didn’t want him to know that they were trying to go get him. That’s another reason to seal an indictment. It’s someone you don’t have your hands on you don’t want them to flee although I don’t. Assange is where he is and that Ecuadorian Ministry and another thing related to this that I was thinking about is that so we’re in this moment right now where Whitaker is the acting attorney general he does not have confirmation from the Senate and he hasn’t been nominated. But Trump is still dangling out there that possibility. And I wonder if that makes this kind of relatively safe moment or extends the period of safety for the MA investigation in the sensitive. Whitaker has any prayer of being confirmed by the Senate. He can not interfere with that investigation. And so if he thinks that that’s any kind of possibility has an incentive to let Mueller be for now and he there was a report that he told Lindsey Graham that he wasn’t going to mess with Mueller.


S17: But that’s very gutsy.


S14: I mean what does that could be true or not true. But even if it’s not true it’s interesting that someone wanted that idea out there whether it was Graham or Whitaker.


S7: Right. Right exactly. One other thing we should mention is Michael Cohen was in town on Veterans Day I spotted at the court at the courthouse or something which suggests he’s continuing to participate.


S10: I want to on your point Emily I think it’s a really good point and it does seem to me that Whitaker is going out of his way to at least signal publicly Oh I’m not going to defang an investigation I’m not going after it maybe because he wants the big job or maybe for some other reason. It also I feel like and maybe I’m always wrong about this kind of stuff. So take it for what it’s worth that what that kind of priced into the Trump administration and priced into everything that’s been going on is basically that well Manafort and Gates are guilty.


S6: You know we’ll go to prison but no one cares about them. But that stone and some other sort of stone figures around stone and Don Junior are all going to go down and that they’ve sort of accepted like that. I’m sure there’ll be a vigorous defense of Don Junior. But I think everyone thinks like that dudes that dude’s got trouble. And then as long as the investigation kind of doesn’t stretch much beyond that as long as there isn’t a huge amount of other material in either in time or in scope that it doesn’t stretch beyond that that that that’s something the Trump administration can more or less live with the way I might. This is just my gut feeling is they’re letting they’re letting it happen. They’re not interfering too much because they’re sort of expecting those things are expecting Don Junior and stone to get indicted and maybe you know other figures around around them and as long as that’s it they can you know let Mueller issues report and kind of be done with it and it won’t require some larger interference. And that’s why Whitaker isn’t threatening it. That’s why there’s not more noise about it.


S16: It’s that it’s that they are they’ve sort of assumed that it’s not going to stretch much beyond that although do they have to that we would have to worry about now that they didn’t have to worry about before is that the people who determine what stretches are now in control of the House of Representatives which is that well not for the Mueller investigation. Well but the Mole investigation will present its report and then the House will be hit will respond. So if they indict Don Jr. Don junior presumably if there’s something to it. Well one of the things that he may be in trouble for is not telling the truth to investigators in the house so that that’s one thing that mushrooms into a bigger problem. But what. I mean the key thing about Don Junior is he’s at that June meeting with the Russians who were at the meeting supposedly coming from the Russian government with dirt on Hillary Clinton. So you know will there be proof that Donald Trump knew nothing about that meeting. That would be something you could imagine. House investigators looking into and it’s not crazy to ask that question. I guess the point is if Don Junior is involved it’s a short trip to the president and the. And the short trip in political distance is really what we need to think about there is could Democrats have an investigation that goes beyond Mueller and says look this isn’t crazy. It took to investigate these questions because Don Junior was so close to his father.


S14: Isn’t it also just a big deal that the son of the president who was heavily involved in his campaign is getting indicted. I just I don’t I’m like It’s like we’ve skipped over that. That does not seem to me something that the Trump administration can shrug off right.


S7: And especially also one of the things is the president is John Junior’s response about what he was doing at that meeting which the president had a hand in in that in crafting that political statement which was which was at what we call not true or known in the in the business is a lie.


S10: Yeah. I don’t know it just feels like it if there’s not that much more than what we we the public already know. That’s fine.


S9: That’s a totally adequate rebuttal. It’s an outrage. It’s outrageous. It’s that rage.


S5: All right all about this I’m irritated by your. I’m haunted by all of it.


S13: The premise that you can be blasé and also that there’s any reason to think that we know everything when every time Mueller’s issued an indictment there have been new and juicy facts and he’s been professionally.


S18: Well no that bill that that’s a that’s a very fair point. Emily which is that the investigation has always been out of the reporting which is as it should be.


S13: And thank goodness for that and kind of a miracle also.


S10: But in all the leaking I just mean as a poll a matter of politics and a matter of like. Will this have consequence. Of course it’s consequential for Don Junior if he goes to prison. And of course it must be frustrating for the for the president that his son could be indicted and that his buddy Roger Stone could be indicted. But I just don’t know as a as a big political matter. It doesn’t feel to me that if that’s the if that is the nut of what the Mueller investigation comes to is what sort of more or less what we already know. I’m sure with with you know trailing strands and Phil degrees elsewhere it doesn’t seem to me that that what will fundamentally change how people Americans think about it how whether it doesn’t. It doesn’t change it doesn’t make it likely the president is impeached or removed from office for this.


S9: So although they are credit although there are clearly crimes.


S13: Well so are you saying that unless Trump is indicted or all I mean unless. Yeah. Is your standard unless Trump is indicted and impeached that there are no political ramifications because that seems wrong to me right. Like first of all Miller could write a report in which he lays out all the evidence for obstruction of justice and asks puts it in Congress’s court. Right. Second of all the piling up of indictments including Don Junior would could matter a lot politically going into 2020 even if Trump remains in office which I still think he probably will. Right. You still have those political ramifications playing out and perhaps a distancing of other elected Republican officials from a president who would appear more and more battered and potentially toxic and 20 20 just picking up on that last point I wonder.


S16: So what you just described is the way things used to operate in the old world.


S5: No I ain’t no. No no it’s true no. And I and I don’t mean to suggest that I’m sorry back to those all right. Right right. No.


S11: So what you say makes perfect sense except I’m just have fresh in my memory something that happened this week and we talked about it last week the this is the sticking to the partisanship that allows a norm shifting president to then bring along huge other institutions whether it’s the Senate or the Republican Party in this week the president attacked Admiral McRaven who was the head of Special Operations a 37 year veteran of the services a Navy SEAL was highly respected led the operations that captured Saddam and killed bin Laden. And the president basically responded to McRaven his claim that the president’s attacks on the press were the greatest threat to democracy by saying well he’s a he’s a basically a political hack he’s a supporter of Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama. Clinton piece was not true. Yes he worked for Obama. But that’s different than the partisan support. Right. And so just the absolute partisan response from the president as opposed to say a previous president who would have mirrored and said Well I respect his service but I disagree with his opinion. So the Republican Party then starts tweeting out things about McRaven saying basically like he was on Hillary Clinton shortlist. So now you have the Republican Party a party that’s traditionally been associated with respecting the military and the people who serve and served with as much distinction as McRaven did basically taking the president’s line. So you have this shift so back to what you were saying Emily the distance is the distance doesn’t seem to be created by people. So you know Jeff Flake creates distance but he’s on his way out.


S15: Yeah.


S14: Although this week he did say he would hold up judges waiting for the actual judge who doesn’t get confirmed because of Jeff Flake’s missing vote. And then I will give Jeff Flake some credit and tell that I don’t want to hear about.


S11: Let me let me add one other thing which is we’re highly into the realm of the speculative here because Don junior hasn’t even been indicted but it does seem David that one thing that when this all finally comes out I mean we must tally the the existing tally which is that you have the president’s former national security adviser his campaign chairman his campaign deputy that have all been charged. And so his lawyer is jar you know his most is fixer. So any new person especially if that person to engage in the speculation again if that person has the same name with just a little junior at the end is on top of a pretty big mountain already of people. And that will create responses from the president which will have political ramifications because this is obviously something that the president when he is attacked and in any movement against his son would be seen as that he responds double force. So I think the political ramifications would be the earthquake also created by the president’s in response.


S10: Last question on this Emily it now seems very clear the president will not sit at least will not voluntarily sit for an interview with the Mueller team. He told Chris Wallace an interview on Fox that he wouldn’t do it. He is going to answer some of the written questions that were posed to him. Well he’s not answered them as lawyers as lawyers continuum are going to answer some of the written questions that are posed to him. He had been saying essentially since the investigation started of course he would sit down for an interview. He wanted to do it. Do you think that there’s any possibility that that we get a subpoena and a kind of compel testimony here number one and number two. Was it oppose all the way along that he wanted to sit for an interview. Never. It always seemed to me insane to think that he could voluntarily sit for an interview. Given how mendacious he is.


S13: But maybe I’m wrong so you know a braggadocio. What’s the word braggart. He’s also a braggart and practices braggadocio. Yeah. His ragged Toshio precisely. And I have no idea whether he really believed he would sit for the interview or was just bluffing. I agree with you that his lawyers would you know have laid their bodies down to make sure that he did not do so. I sort of think that subpoenaing the president to sit for an interview is not the Hill that Mueller is going to die on because I’m not sure how important it is. I mean obviously if you’re a prosecutor you want to ask these questions. You’re you are trying to figure out a charge of obstruction of justice in particular which depends on mindset. And so when you have all these facts you can line up to try to catch someone you want to ask those questions directly. I also think that if Trump’s lawyers don’t answer some written questions Mueller can infer from that that you know they don’t want to answer them. And unless Trump pleads the Fifth those inferences could be part of an indictment. You could imagine that. I think though as I said that look I mean we already there are already lots of reasons to think that Mueller won’t actually indict Trump because of the Justice Department memos that suggest he doesn’t have that authority when he’s writing this report presumably for Congress to consider impeachment. He can explain the answers that Trump did and didn’t give and Congress can make a decision either way. And then I guess there’s also this sort of question down the road after Trump is out of office what kind of legal exposure he would have.


S10: I just don’t I just I know Emily that you’re right. Like it’s it’s an outrage it’s a terrible the whole but you’re over it. No it’s not that I’m over it. I just don’t I don’t know that. No I’m not.


S9: But yes I’m over to the trap of like it’s just that I is meaningless like I know what it feels that way but we don’t have to like. No we don’t. All right.


S10: It’s an outrage there’s so many outrages that just this outrage that this outrage has taken a disproportionate amount of people’s mental energy and time compared to what it can actually accomplish whereas I think the policy stuff is much more important. I think the actual I’ve come around. I think his personal corruption the part the corruption within the administration is more was more important in a way than the story by corruption really speaks to people gets people really irritated when you learn that somebody is wasting money on some bullshit.


S13: Yeah I totally agree with that. I mean I think if you are a liberal who wants the Mueller investigation to be the magic bullet that is going to slay Donald Trump in one second and make him go poof then you’re probably going to be disappointed. It’s the heat that Trump has done a masterful job at making it seem partisan and complicated and like a witch hunt does he keep saying even though Mueller is like the least partisan person walking around in the country. So you know that all of those things are true it has also been true that every time Mueller has actually acted it’s been highly professional and reassuring and it’s professionalism.


S10: So it will be you know the best that a highly trained and skillful American prosecutor has to offer so Slate Plus members you get bonus segments on got fest and other slate podcast today’s bonus segment we can talk about whether Thanksgiving is a liberal or a conservative holiday or neither. Perhaps go to Slate accomplished gabfest plus to become a member. Today the camp fire continues to burn in Northern California while the Woolsey fire is more contained in Southern California. Together the two fires have burned more than 250000 acres. That’s I think about six entire Washington D.C. as if my math is right. The town of Paradise really the small city of Paradise has been destroyed more than 70 people are dead about a 1000 people are on a missing persons list just for the campfire. The damage is going to be in the tens of billions of dollars and it’s going to continue to cause people to suffer the smoke for example dangerous smoke has been choking lots of California including the Bay Area. There will be more fires. The hot and dry conditions will continue. It is a terrible dangerous awful situation and it has a kind of relentlessness. An earthquake is a single episode a single incident which causes tremendous damage. The thing about these fires as they come. They come again and they take them a long time to get controlled and they are controlled. Then they reappear it’s there they’re relentless in this way that’s quite awful. So Emily start with you.


S19: Why is it that there is so much more fire now than there was is there so much more fire in California in particular and there was there is more fire or at least the biggest fires that are doing the most damage are recent fires almost entirely.


S13: There are a few factors there is climate change which is raising the temperature just enough to make all this flammable material more burnable combustible. There are old standing fire suppression tactics where all of this material has not been allowed to burn in the past and so there is more of it. And then there’s people and where they live and the fact that there were twenty seven thousand people in Paradise which Paradise California that is and they were there you know kind of heartbreakingly because housing is so expensive in California that this was like a haven for them. But the price they were paying was to be in the path of this fire. And so you know the one thing that strikes me about these fires which is also true of hurricanes and other extreme weather events is the stories are like Armageddon right. I mean we see these cars we see these people we hear these like terrifying audios of people who literally are in fear that they will be burned to a crisp. And it’s like we’re returning to some past in which we couldn’t count on safety and security and the predictability of American at least middle class life could no longer be taken for granted. And there’s just something so I don’t know what the word is like willfully crazy about not addressing particularly climate change and thus putting some members of our society at risk of these terrifying events that in most of the rest of everything we do we try so hard to prevent. I mean it reminds me also of gun violence in its way we’re like the most important thing is keeping children safe except like oh no we have all these firearms that hurt people and that’s like this exposure that this risk this vulnerability that we’re willing to countenance and the way we make our peace with it is we just assume that will never be us like driving our car with our kids while these like telephone wires and logs are burning and crashing down around us. But when you have to really think about it it’s totally bizarre and terrifying.


S10: But just one point there Emily which is of course I mean I agree with you 98 percent with what you said and I you know I certainly that the feelings that you expressed there are ones that I share but I would say that the this period where life as a citizen life as a human being was pretty safe and secure and you didn’t have to worry about natural disaster or disease or whatever it’s been a pretty brief period. Well yeah that’s the secure middle class the backstopped by society period and even in a rich country like America it’s been it’s been sort of 50 years and it’s never applied to everyone to your right.


S14: But I don’t think that we expected it to end. I mean no our lifetime. Exactly. Well I take it for granted.


S7: Also the speeding up of history. So let’s say it’s been 50 years the speeding up of history makes it feel it feels to me makes you feel like it was longer in the past. So you know all of the devices when I was talking to the director of the CDC said you know if there’s another pandemic it will strip us down to primitive life because all of the comforts and devices and things we have that are the structure of modernity all go away and they’re all useless against this thing. And so you’re back to the age where you’re knocking rocks against each other to make and which many of us are not going to farewell right.


S14: Not going to farewell me or knocking rocks against each other. Exactly I don’t know where anything well but this is what’s this.


S18: I mean I wish we were talking about the Michael Lewis book The Fifth the risk. We could talk about the rest.


S10: Well we haven’t but we all. I wish we were doing it systematically. We’ll do it systematically one day. But one of the points he makes is that is that sort of the the great value of government is not necessarily visible every day it sort of risks avoided it’s things to put off because you you maintain the highways you because you invest in education so your population is smarter you have you maintain adequate supplies of that vaccine.


S20: Right. And that is what is that’s what’s alarming.


S13: And not these career professionals whose whole job is to protect you and stave off those dangers and they are being properly husband did as a resource. Right by the federal government and taking them for granted and that that whole apparatus and mission for granted is such an enormous mistake.


S16: One thing I would add to the list that Emily gave us the Santa Ana winds which are part of what create the devastation here at one point the winds were blowing so hard that the fire was not actually burning the trees it was burning it was blowing sideways. And so the fire was burning the cars and the homes and the trees around were were surviving just to the point about severity since records were kept in 1932. The 10 largest fires have been since 2000 five since 2010. And two of the largest fires in California history happened this year alone. All right. So that just get that the to the climate point I think we’re up two or three degrees in in California.


S21: Then then I don’t know what the baseline for that is but it’s two to three degrees more in temperature.


S14: Can we talk about affordable housing in California. Because you know there was and could still be a proposal to relax zoning rules so that more affordable housing can be built along transportation networks like in San Francisco region BART which is you know the Metro effectively and you could imagine a couple of parts of California where you you know build up you build more densely you allow people to move into the cities by taking advantage of these transportation hubs and the people who can only afford to live like up on a hill or it’s dangerous get to come down from the hill and down from the fire danger if Gavin Newsom the new governor of California is really serious about helping California and making it a better place to live. This would be a huge thing that he could do to address inequality which is an enormous problem.


S10: Well you know what is crazy about this is climate change is not a problem that the governor of California can fix on his own rising heat is not a problem that the governor of California can fix or the legislature of California can fix or the legislature the United States even can fix. But there are so this is a problem which policy can have such an impact on and there was a great article and I’m sorry I didn’t know who wrote it about comparing the fire response to what the Dutch have done around. Sea level rise and the Dutch have done around just the fact that it’s a low lying country in a time when the storms are worse and the sea is rising and the Dutch government I mean it’s a it’s a it’s an existential threat to the Netherlands and there has been this huge investment in amelioration in ways to just spend some money to make it safer you know that there is going to be damage. But let’s make it safer. Let’s you know avoid losing as much properties we can’t let’s avoid losing life and let’s make those upfront investments. And you have really smart people doing it. And in the case of fire in California there are so many policy measures that can be taken which aren’t even partisan that could be taken that would make a difference. I mean end housing is a great one. I mean that is that is a key one. It’s urban density isn’t one cure for this not because it wouldn’t it would cause not fires that happen I just mean that people weren’t being affected as badly by these fires. They weren’t losing property in a way they’re losing property but also the policies about removing flammable material from around homes like you requiring people to use less flammable materials in home construction removal brush and dead trees. There’s all sorts of things which are which are a matter of state local policy that can make a huge difference until people should frickin MIT do it. It’s just crazy not to. But there’s this this resistance to government action which has pervaded American life and to regulation and it’s just causing us to to do stupid things.


S7: And it’s frustrating these moments of crisis where the whole nation turns its head to watch the horrible effects of they are a moment where a president who is the one to the extent we have a national voice can tee up what you’re talking about David which is the world has convened or at least the United States has convened in this moment. And so a policy response or at least convening people to come up with a policy response is one of the powers a president has. And that’s why you know the president talking about raking in Finland was was obviously off the mark by what he actually said. But also the response to it was kind of was not. I mean people just made fun of him and the press like fact checked whether these rakes in Finland and the moment wasn’t used to talk about what you’re talking about to talk about obviously with the big actual differences in Finland which is it’s a lot colder and wetter there than in California and that’s why it was an absurd analogy not whether they actually use rakes or not which was the subject of some of the fact checks whether they actually use rakes or not which which suggests to me that the fact checkers had totally missed the entire point. And you know they can make fun of the president but when the people doing the fact checking miss the point of the why the analogy break down breaks down and by missing the point miss an opportunity to to educate people about actually what happened then that’s failed.


S10: Also it’s also there’s in Finland there’s this tremendous private public partnership around this that pilots all the. Oh yes. Why. Like we are taught first spoke out. You have to look at the lookout for fires if they catch fires much earlier.


S14: Yeah. You know I was thinking about this this morning. Part of me appreciates the moments of humor that come out of Trump’s more ridiculous statements like suddenly there’s a meme of a rake and a fire and everyone’s like taking a break. But there’s also something like definitely nihilistic about it. Right. It’s like you’re not thinking about all the actual policy matters or choices you were just talking about right. You’re not using it as an opportunity to educate. You’re just like mocking in this way that doesn’t really teach anyone anything. And it becomes this total as usual like long cul de sac of distraction rather like that’s why it gets attention because it’s really easy to glom onto. I don’t know what to do about that complaining about it makes me feel humourless and like miserly do you all think. I


S10: mean who the hell knows. But there there are a thousand people on this list and collect Clara Jeffrey our our colleague the editor of Mother Jones former colleague of mine beloved colleague of mine noted that if there were a thousand people missing in the East Coast every minute of the day would be focused on this issue the fact that it’s out in the West and that it’s more the kind of remote community has made people blasé about it. Do you think there’s anything to that and also do you think it’s also that people think Oh there aren’t really a thousand people who are going to die in this fire. That’s just somebody misinterpreted something.


S21: Well the coverage of it has been a little uneven. I mean I must say TV has we a lot of people out there so.


S7: But I think there’s probably something to what she’s saying. I mean there’s undoubtedly something to what she’s saying the East Coast versus West Coast media focus issue is pretty well well established. But I think there based on what I’ve read there is a thousand people doesn’t mean a thousand. There are a lot of people based on the reporting I’ve read. Have haven’t done any actual reporting myself but that there are people who are on the list who don’t even know they’re on the list and that it’s according to one official I read who said basically they put anybody anybody who calls 9 1 1 and says I can’t find Joe or Uncle Sam Uncle Sam gets put on the list.


S8: This is down now speaking metaphorically. Uncle Sam gets put on the list. Weirdly Uncle Sam was on the list. Yes.


S7: Kind of my Uncle Sam gets put a foot on the list and then Uncle Sam doesn’t know he’s on the list and he doesn’t go check the list and so he remains on the list. And once I found Uncle Sam I don’t call back up and say Hey take him off the list.


S9: So the list is created to be over inclusive and I think that’s part of what’s going on. That’s a short believe. There are a thousand people who are. But what you will be sure there will be there are a lot tonight zero missing and dead.


S14: And that is horrible. I mean yeah I’m sure John and Claire are right about West versus East Coast. I think there’s also just this period of drip drip unknown information that confuses the media about how seriously to treat it.


S10: Well just one small story which actually hasn’t really nothing to do with the fires themselves that I found so outrageous. There’s there’ve been stories which are which are supposed to be heartwarming about prison California prison inmates fighting these fire rate and being paid a dollar a day to do it and of course you know I we I thank them for their service and I’m sure they’re there. They’re doing great work. And it’s it’s it’s dangerous and risky and but there was this outrageous story about the if you are a California prisoner you come out of prison and you’ve had this experience fighting fires you can’t actually get a job as a firefighter because most firefighters in California have to be trained as EMT years and if you have a prison record it’s very hard to get. You’re basically barred from getting an EMT license as a as a former felon. And so then you can’t become a firefighter so even though you have this useful skill that you have learned serving the public you’re then barred. What a waste of human capacity. What a waste of goodwill. That’s really infuriating.


S13: There is a great magazine piece in my very own New York Times Magazine about exactly this issue by Jamie Lowe It’s called the incarcerated women who fight California’s wildfires and it’s about them as human beings and you know what it would take which is not very much to change his whole picture so that you know inmates are being trained for something women who are in prison are being trained for something that then they have as a marketable skill when they get out.


S10: I did not read that story but as part of it the unseemly power of these public employee unions particularly firefighter and police unions which are just grotesquely powerful and even more so in California than in other places.


S13: I don’t remember which is a bar.


S10: I mean they serve as this bar. Is this a professional bar. I mean it’s it’s the whole way in which credentialing just prevents people from entering professions other really good reasons. Obviously there are you can imagine there kinds of people who who should not be allowed to get a firefighter license if you are an arsonist.


S18: You okay with that. That’s a very small number of people. Right. Clear right.


S21: Yeah. One other angle to this which is interesting to me just because I’m interested and only and not that knowledgeable about but the way in which private industry has to make decisions and claims based on climate change science in a way that if governments aren’t acting private industry has to sue PG&E is being sued by 400 or more people who say basically they should shut the power off when the conditions got to this tinderbox up level and they said Well they the conditions didn’t meet our normal standards. Well they are facing liability for this destruction. And I wonder how that will It’s hammered their stock which is down like almost half because they may not be able to cover the right insurance be able to cover the gap. So what good what in the future will any company that worries about liability in California for potentially starting or contributing to the start of a fire how they have to calculate that into their business model particularly PG&E.


S10: Yeah I mean I don’t have any knowledge about PG&E and no doubt they’re voracious and rapacious and terrible and all kinds of ways. But it does seem pretty unfair. I mean these are these are conditions that are beyond the control of PG&E and PG&E law obligation as the public utility in that area is to provide people with power and to provide business power and it’s a kind of damned if you do damned if you don’t know. And this is one of these situations where from what I’ve seen is that PGD lines and is are causing fires at this that never happened a generation ago it’s not that they suddenly their equipment is shoddy it’s just that the conditions are terrible and you know they can’t on their own bury all the power lines in California it cost prohibitively huge amount of money. And so it does seem does seem unfair to make them the liable party here Facebook worse than even we ever thought possible. We’ve been Facebook skeptics here at Gap a central East Emily and I have been Facebook skeptics I don’t I’m not sure if Jon’s policy on Facebook for a while and last week the last few weeks have brought a series of stories that highlight just how vastly itself presentation differs from its actuality. There have been a number of bad stories in the past year obviously the evidence that Russian trolls pervaded Facebook throughout the 2016 campaign. The shame of Cambridge analytic and the way that Facebook allowed it to take all kinds of data that shouldn’t have been public and you shouldn’t have been shared with it and use that to possibly manipulate campaigns. Now comes a damning new York Times investigation by some of Emily’s colleagues that shows that the company upon learning about the Russian manipulation. I’m learning about the kind of ways in which Facebook was being put to use in the election campaign that the company behaved in really poor ways. What did what did your colleague for the time find Emily and why was it so depressing.


S14: Well confronted with information from Alex Stamos and his team Stamos was like the head of security of Facebook at the time and he had basically on his own taken a team to really investigate the Russian interference and postings because nobody else was doing it and seemed to want to know and also at Facebook after Mark Zuckerberg said following the election that he thought it was crazy to imagine that these political posts on on his own site could have affected the election. People at Facebook were like wait a second this was happening and so they set out to prove it. And at a moment when the Facebook board was being briefed and got upset and said wait a second why didn’t you tell us about this earlier. This is a huge deal we need to address it. It seems that Charles Samberg yelled at Alex Stamos and got angry about having been blindsided supposedly as opposed to hearing this information and taking in the substance of it and saying oh my god this company is a force for destruction in a way that Zuckerberg and I didn’t understand and now we’re going to go and deal with it. And the thing about this report is it’s both incredibly revealing and yet in its own way not surprising. Like if you are the people of the head of that company you have an enormous amount invested in seeing it as a force of good in the world. We’ve seen so many indications from Zuckerberg and Sandberg that they just have drunk that Kool-Aid and it’s larger Silicon Valley phenomenon right. They’re like particularly noticeable and important in their manifestation of it. But my experience of reporting in Silicon Valley is lots of people are drinking that Kool-Aid. So then when it turns out not to be true it’s like fundamentally undermining to one’s whole identity. To imagine that actually this this institution this company was doing bad things all along and you didn’t recognize it and you didn’t stop it and you kind of didn’t care about it or signal to anyone that was of importance. And so I think that this time story shows Samberg and Zuckerberg continuing in that line and doing some nefarious things I mean hiring this like you know kind of secretive political opposition ad firm or whatever public relations firm to start putting ceding fake posts and like blaming George Soros. I mean to have these two Jewish corporate leaders out there like adding to the anti-Semitic attacks that used George Soros as like its pinata. I just that really made me and I think a lot of other people kind of noxious and so we’re just seeing this internal picture of a corporation that is enormously powerful and is not responsible in its use of power.


S17: One of the things that’s always been a disconnect is between the public outrage about Facebook and their responses which have always seemed to kind of miss the what people need. So you know in any of these instances where somebody is apology just doesn’t meet the moment there is have always felt just insufficient. And so when the Times piece came out the idea that they were behind the scenes going on the offense to try to create and the reason as I understand it these are the kind of connection to George Soros was a part of the strategy was to basically. And it’s not unlike what some politicians do which is to discredit the criticism as having been ginned up. So in other words this big thing everybody’s going to be concerned about it’s really ginned up and so don’t be so concerned about it which affirms the underlying skepticism people may have had that they didn’t take the criticism seriously in the first place.


S11: And so they’re now in the response to the New York Times story. Sheryl Sandberg and her in an interview she did with Norah O’Donnell was basically basically said I had ZERO to do with any of this which is so implausible and if it were true would be upsetting because that was her job right.


S7: There you go. That that you’ve just.


S20: The contrast between their self presentation and the hacker utopian self presentation and the dingy trite reality of how they behave is so extraordinary. You don’t expect you don’t expect you know Exxon Mobile to you know to to have utopian hoo ha coming out of there their pie hole they think they’ve you know they’re big gigantic company and they’re going to protect their interests. You’re not surprised if you learn that Exxon Mobile or company X is using crisis PR company to discredit its opponents. OK. That’s that’s a standard tactic. It is. It is that contrast. It’s so galling and and the the the hypocrisy of it is so and I mean they hired Schumer’s daughter. That’s another one that I love. They hired Chuck Schumer’s daughter to two to spin for them. Sandberg Sandberg personally worked over Amy Klobuchar using some of her Lean In credibility to go kind of quiet at least in her Facebook posts.


S9: Right. Yeah.


S20: And John your point about their apologies is such a good one they’re always apologizing for stuff and it’s always a it’s just not it’s it’s words without meaning to their. And nothing seems to change afterwards they’re just an amazing little vice episode where Vice posed so they have a they’ve a functionality on Facebook where you can buy ads at brought you sponsored by or like intern remember that the term it’s basically to. You would identify the ad is coming from a legitimate source. And so Vice posed as every single senator. They just pretended to be all the senators and bought a bunch of ads pretending to be that Senator. Facebook didn’t check they didn’t see if that was actually a senator. They didn’t care.


S10: They just let you know so you could go and buy an ad pretending to be Lindsey Graham and you know make any wild accusation you want to make or make any claim you want to make and it would probably Facebook with it would let it through. No. Facebook said oh no they all you know they they said Oh this didn’t meet our standards.


S5: We made a mistake there I made a mistake 100. They’re always making mistakes they’re not doing anything not doing anything we know. Yes. Yeah sorry.


S10: One other one other point sorry well I just. Just to get this point out then I’ll shut up is Kevin Ruess the journalist is between the joint God’s work where he’s been tracking what are the most popular Facebook posts on particular subjects and what he has shown consistently is so Facebook has made such a big deal about how we’re gonna get you know more honorable sources more credible sources you know we’re going to we’re going to make sure that the fake news isn’t circulating and Bruce points out that on any given story if you look six eight nine of the top 10 stories are going to be extremely right wing often conspiratorial sometimes sometimes it’s just right wing media spin on something but it’s often conspiratorial spin on it. So for all they’ve talked about over work we’re cleaning up the platform actually the stuff that continues to be most popular that it continue to circulate most broadly is the crap and and and there’s a there’s a wonderful Washington Post story about Eli Saslow the brilliant reporter about a site called was it called a Facebook site called America’s last line of defense which is literally a liberal parody site set up by a guy just to troll right wingers and he’d make he would make up stories that would really be like Hillary Clinton dies in secret overseas mission to smuggle smuggle more refugees into America and you wouldn’t write these fake stories and they they’re hugely popular because conservative yeah didn’t paranoid parody yet don’t recognize parody and circulate it widely and it just just propagates these lies and has Facebook you know his Facebook crackdown on his creepy Facebook you know said oh you know this stuff is illegitimate or this is having a baleful effect. No no they don’t give a shit. They don’t care what they say.


S17: Well I just wonder whether marketers at some point will start to say now we don’t wanna be associated with that world or whether they are just too gargantuan for marketers to leave and whether anybody could create a social platform social networking platform that that lacked some of the either public relations problems that Facebook has faced or the just in general solves for the vinegar arenas of social media. I don’t know if that’s even possible but it seems like that that opportunity is becoming more and more happening.


S18: One of the thing about Instagram I actually think has some of that role Instagram is a much sweeter platform. Yes Instagram lacks owned by Facebook. Oh and by Facebook and Facebook is done a great job of protecting it. And although there are I don’t know the founders of Instagram yet. All right. I’m sorry.


S7: Sorry that day laughter but one other thing about the apologies is felt is that often I felt like the responses that were couched as apologies were actually just marketing statements so they would say we’re really taking you know we’re really focusing on security and the focus on pace and growing our our user base. That maybe caused us to overlook some of these security problems before we’re not doing that. We’re focusing now on user engagement which felt like a marketing pitch like they have they have their moment that everybody’s focusing on them. They know they’re gonna to make an apology but then they like tack on like here’s the fun part of Facebook we’re focusing on now. So keep being involved in that. So that seemed to me to kind of undermine the authenticity of some of those apologies as well.


S14: I was really struck by something my colleague Nick Confessore is sad which is that you know a century ago Upton Sinclair exposed this like totally horrifying nature of you know meat marketing and it is a jungle and right in the jungle and his like famous muckraking book about American factories and food products Shen and before that we thought of these as I guess I wasn’t there but like these were assumed to be a kind of virtuous or at least neutral morally neutral companies. And Facebook is having that kind of moment and we’re all having a moment of realizing that social media which presented itself as this you know Silicon Valley like making the world better that that’s not true it’s not and it. And what happened after the jungle was that the food industry got regulated and that is what Facebook is desperate desperately trying to stave off. And what is enormously needed right now. So when I read the Facebook is talking about creating some independent quote you know cord that is going to be deciding what can be posted and not it does not reassure me it is time for the government to come in and set some limits and think about also whether this company needs to have some anti-trust changes made to it also. I mean maybe Facebook should not own Instagram and WhatsApp and Snapchat And yeah yuck.


S7: So I don’t know if this is where you were we were about say David about the jungle but my favorite line from that was I know you’re about like this. Yes I wrote a book to hit people in the heart and I hit him in the stomach because he was trying to raise awareness about your guess who works. I think that was his name who worked in you know these awful conditions and people didn’t care so much about him they cared about the food that was coming to them and whether it was healthy. But this leads to another question I have about Facebook from a business standpoint which is you know what kind of what do people want from social media. And has the underlying when this all first started happening I thought yeah people don’t like whatever bad things are happening Facebook but ultimately like they want to connect and they want to be. You know I want to check out what’s happening with my nephews and how they’re to post stuff and write their voices heard.


S8: Right. And we should all sympathize. Yeah. Journalist right. Exactly.


S7: So I kind of thought that that poll would continue that people would would would say Yeah I don’t like this stuff over here but gosh I really enjoy being able to like see pictures of McClane Virginia in the 1970s when I grew up and there’s really no other place I can go to for that. So I wonder from a user standpoint I know a lot of people say like I’m never going on back on Facebook but I feel like my Facebook feed is still pretty well populated with all of that stuff and that people are still using it.


S10: You know what to me is weird though. JOHN Well yes I think a lot of people still do use it and especially people who are older remember yeah that’s why it’s important that they own these other services where they are yes to it. About 10 years ago or more when I was editor of Slate I signed Emily Yoffe to write a story which was called I think the headline was Facebook and 50 something where she was then 50 or 51 or something and went on Facebook and the idea was Oh my God it’s so funny how funny would it be to be an old person on Facebook. And now of course Facebook has become a platform for old people. But I do think that that it is really I mean people tend to lump all these services together they tend to say you know put put put them all Oh it’s the social media has this detrimental effect and oh Twitter or Google Facebook Instagram but it really is much worse. With Facebook I Twitter there’s lots of problems with Twitter and I can see absolutely why people wouldn’t want to be on it but sorry just banged I was so excited just banged the chair Forget that noise. But at the same time like Twitter is more or less does what you expected to it it is always. I’ve always understood it if it behaves in the way that Twitter is comfortable.


S5: I don’t know what you’re talking about Twitter does your job of monitoring its content.


S13: It doesn’t have you know real name requirements which makes it like a total trash heap. It may behave as you expected to. You have a thick skin.


S9: But I don’t think that we can crack the Twitter is any better that it’s smaller. It has that maybe that maybe was a journalist for journalists it’s catnip because we’re on there like gossiping and watching each other.


S10: But I don’t think it’s like well I guess I just don’t for a lot of people I don’t think it does that kind of pervasive damage that Facebook does. I don’t think Google does. I don’t think Instagram does WhatsApp I don’t know enough about.


S9: I don’t think that is like Pinterest or Snapchat.


S14: Other countries like including in Brazil by having these like mass group chats that spread totally false and like inciting to violence information.


S10: So your view is that all social media are bad.


S14: No I don’t I feel some hope about Instagram. I think there’s something about the more visual nature of it that seems to make it like I don’t know. I like to be ruined so it does seem like there is a way in which these things go toward the lowest common denominator. I don’t know. I’d like to think otherwise. I’m all for connecting.


S17: I as an anti-social person I’m not all for connecting and basically could tell all of you that this was predictable years ago right.


S5: Well that’s interesting. So say more about that. You feel you don’t want to be bombarded by.


S11: Well no it’s not true because I don’t know I that was a that was a stupid detour.


S17: I guess what I was wondering is whether this is a solvable problem for Facebook so they can apologize and apologize in the higher billions of people to monitor this and the other thing. But it seems to me that the only solution to to restoring what it once was is to find and I know they’re searching madly for this some new great reason for everybody to want to be on it and and generate a good feeling about being on it because are you really going to get credit if you stop all the bad stuff from happening people you know maybe there will be so many stories that you hear in the news and maybe 10 years down the road people would say oh they had that rough patch but now you know they’ve they’ve sort of survived but to regain its place that it once had. It seems to me it’s got to it’s got two problems. It’s got to kind of put out this problem solve this problem and then the other big problem is how do you create meaningful engagement. You know in a world of so many competitors with interesting and fascinating content that’s that’s a super hard thing to do.


S14: But the putting out the solving the problem is doable. I mean it would take money and it would take a willingness to censor and regulate speech. Absolutely. But those things are attainable. Like you don’t have to have the Kevin Ruth list of you know wildly circulating conspiracy theory posts every week. That is not a necessary Yeah.


S17: I guess what I feel like is this is like when we installed new windows in our house we spent all this money installing the new windows their house and you basically can’t. The house looks exactly the same right. I mean helps on the energy bills a little bit but it’s basically fixing these problems are just a massive massive sunk cost for which they will get some credit but which they will not overcome the deficit they’re in as a result of all these problems and the and the odor that is now attached to set to Facebook.


S15: That’s not a disagreement that I just examined there they’re totally totally. No no I’m just saying like that.


S7: Yes I guess I’m just trying to to line up all the problems they face and see whether you know there was a situation there what their end and when they felt though and you were talking before about advertisers and you know whether people are going to start to walk away solving the problem.


S14: Yes do a lot to reassure advertisers that in terms of the tax compliance and it does matter right.


S22: That’s an excellent point.


S10: Let’s go to cocktail chatter when you’re preparing for Thanksgiving with a really really stiff mulled wine. There can be such a thing as a stiff mulled wine or in my house. It’s usually a sherry and you’re having a sherry. What will you be chattering about. Emily the bath.


S14: I am writing a piece right now about the census. And maybe we will actually make the census into a whole topic in the coming weeks and some. So I need to talk about this. Why. Count me in. Count John in. Thank you. But I just as a preliminary matter I went to the trial in Manhattan that was taking place last week about the census. And what I came away with. So this was mostly a super boring day that I spent because it was this very technical testimony about statistics and how the census is put together. And like the word coefficient and other terms that I like barely remember for math and probably never fully understood anyway. And yeah I came away David is pretending to go to sleep right now. I came away feeling so I was just stretching.


S23: I was enjoying your read.


S14: I came away feeling so reassured and kind of perversely moved by the dedication of our federal bureaucracy. Like here are these teams of people doing these super important tasks that nobody appreciates like the census is one of those things that you know we take for granted. We think of it as just a film to fill form to fill out. Actually it’s a super important underpinning of our democracy which is under threat. And these folks who you know are have dedicated their careers to making this huge apparatus of federal government functional and explaining all the work they do. And there was just something about it that you know I came away thinking like wow this is an amazing feat. And I don’t know if I’m going to succeed in conveying that as a writer. But like I really need to try anyway. So let’s talk more about the census but in the meantime let’s give thanks for the thanks for the census on Thanksgiving.


S12: Yeah. That’s that’s very good. That’s very good.


S10: John I like that. What is your chatter.


S24: My chatter is totally frivolous.


S8: Snoop Dogg you may be familiar with his work. He is Alvin Brody.


S25: K he. Yeah we all think about him during the Thanksgiving season. But but more to the point recently he was. He got a Hollywood star on the Walk of Fame. And I’d just like to read you a passage from his from his remarks at the at the. Whatever what do you do with the leg of the star. The unveiling of the star. He said I want to thank me for believing in me. I want to thank me for doing all this hard work. I want to thank me for having no days off. I want to thank me for never quitting. I want to thank me for always being a giver and trying to give more than I receive. I want to thank me for trying to do more right than wrong.


S24: I want to thank me for just being me at all times. I don’t know why that tickled me but it did. And you should watch the video of it because it’s funny too.


S10: It is true that you don’t get a day off from yourself. That is definitely one of the problems with life. Yeah. It’d be nice to be nice to have a day off a weekend from yourself.


S5: Right. Don’t you know true. Don’t you want a weekend. I don’t like a lot of vacation for my.


S24: So don’t you think that’s why people engage in either go to Renaissance fairs and dress up like elves and wizards or engage in all kinds of other behaviors that literally allow them to try to escape from themselves by creating a difference.


S15: Yeah and why do people that’s why they use drugs. They’re reading books but I don’t know that drinking really is. I mean yes they’re just escaping into a book is great. I mean I find that I have a my escape velocity from a book is much easier than it used to be. You know I find that unless the book really grabs me I’m not the most pressing feature in the modern world yet it is so crucial 10 bodies.


S14: Some like shooting fictional Neri.


S11: Oh my God either yes or you become just a howling void. But so I guess my question is whether in our current moment whether people are it’s not just drinking. You’ve got to have a more immersive experience and whether people seek that out more because people want and it’s an escape from themselves.


S12: I don’t know. How would you quantify that. I don’t know.


S7: I don’t know. The Atlantic writes that nobody’s having sex anymore so they’re not doing it.


S14: That was about kids. That was not about us. It’s about adults too. Oh yeah. I thought it was there was less sex for adults but it was more a kind of generational piece. Was about 20 something.


S10: Yeah but it’s wild. But that’s sort of weirdly about an epidemic of loneliness where in fact people are unable to escape themselves because they are alone right.


S14: I felt on the safe side of the generational dividing line as I do that peace without worried about my children.


S26: Was like OK well Emily I guess it’s also I think I would also say that this is something you know or you don’t like. And I think it’s like the other groovy solution at the moment of T am making sure we’re retreating I need a family admission you may or may not have wanted to make eggs.


S6: I don’t think it’s going to take us back to safety if my chatter which is about Michael Bloomberg.


S23: That for me it’s the least sexual. Actually it’s your male crush. Actually yeah. You can either think about baseball or Michael Bloomberg.


S27: Close your eyes and think of Michael Bloomberg. You’re the only one in America. It’s all personal write in candidate. We all have.


S6: We all have our own special turn ons Emily don’t get shit on mine.


S27: Okay. Go ahead tell us more. It began.


S26: Okay.


S10: As it all as it always ends as it always does with Michael Bloomberg in pajamas no Michael. Michael Bloomberg just donated one point eight billion dollars to Johns Hopkins to guarantee need blind admissions there. It’s the largest university donation ever made apparently which is great. That’s fine. You know I mean big Michael Bloomberg fan. No. No surprises there. But it did put into focus for me just how pointless and terrible everything is.


S5: This is a classic example of something where there’s a billionaire who’s putting a Band-Aid on something for one college and he happens to love and want to pay one point a billion dollars in taxes and that money was distributed to low income people who want to go to lots of colleges and maybe can’t get what you like. I do my chatter wouldn’t you like my child I had the exact same thought about it last night.


S6: It’s outrageous that we were doing this counting on rich people to sort of decide oh well out of the goodness of my heart I’m going to help out a rich already rich college that I want to help out rather than that way too.


S24: Can I just said Can I ask then what. And maybe we should find some way to think about this more systematically but because you could imagine a situation which giving one point eight billion dollars to the federal government might not be the most efficient use of that money. So could you create a system whereby let’s say I have a billion dollars and you all visit me on my island and we want to do with that billion dollars the most efficient and useful thing let’s say just in the education area like early it would go to community colleges or to public universities right.


S14: Or that you would cost out how to have the most impact. That’s not a blind admission.


S5: Well private and could you convene people who could figure out what to do with the money that we’re seeing.


S10: Well but also nope you sure that’s interesting problem. I think that is basically what the Gates Foundation has done to their credit. I think they get foundation is doing that on a global scale. So they’ve looked at what are the what are the problems malaria being a great example which caused the most suffering and lost productivity and loss life and loss pleasure and malaria as one. And so let’s try to tackle that a hazard to them but that doesn’t go to Emily’s point. Of course the government can be less efficient. But but there’s something deeply wrong with a world in which all the wealth is accumulating to a few people who get to make that decision like it actually. And government is not that inefficient. Yes there are certain things the government does much better than anybody else because they are the only ones who can apply that much scale.


S26: The only ones who can build those highways high island ones who can.


S7: I hijacked your point I was sorry I was trying to go off and make it and I ask a separate question which which I’m sorry because it kind of stuck out.


S14: I think those are both valid and interesting thoughts right. If you had a billion dollars and you had a priority which was not the military so you didn’t want half your tax dollars to go to the military or whatever the giant percentages and you had a problem you want to solve like access to college education for low income people which is a huge issue. What would you do. Yeah. How would you best distribute do. And I am all for that. I think it’s hugely important but I’m pretty sure that given all of it to Johns Hopkins you know you know.


S5: That’s right. No I’m not.


S24: Yeah. And I wouldn’t suggest that I guess I was just wondering is if you could imagine. I don’t know are there a lot of billionaires like Michael Bloomberg who would think giving it away. Oh by the way you also want to create a system where you get the credit for it. Right. You don’t get credit for paying your taxes so much so could you create a situation where for the billionaires out there who wanted to good that maybe the Gates Foundation is basically it would that that is the.


S14: How easy would it be to find a way to most effectively channel that money maybe you have Michael Bloomberg scholarships all over the country at different schools as opposed to like every building at Johns Hopkins is named after Michael Bloomberg. Yeah or they would why not just call it Johns Bloomberg or you know Johns Hopkins Bloomberg.


S15: Bloomberg university it’ll be Bloomberg university by the time we’re done about maybe after his death can they finally put the apostrophe in the Johns Hopkins by the way just think John I’m kidding.


S14: I don’t think it’s one of those terms that you’re so proud of yourself when you say correctly like attorneys general. I wrote attorneys general wrong the other day and then I was slightly like mortified but then thought this is just ridiculous.


S7: Yeah. One point seven of the one point eight is going to teach people how to use data correctly in the plural.


S28: We also have a listener shot of this week because you guys continue to tweet great chatters to us at arts like Gaddafi’s emails at Cat fest. It’s like dot com with your excellent ideas for cocktail chatter and this week’s chatter comes from Jonathan booed at Jay Bode BSU the E.


S6: An article in three list by Kevin Alexander which is headlined I found the best burger place in America. And then I killed it and it’s a story about food critic who named a burger and a gritty joint in Portland the best burger in America. And this restaurant then was overwhelmed and just went downhill and became miserable to work there became miserable to go there the staff became unpleasant people. There’s actually some ambiguity about whether the Alexander article was in fact the responsible agent here that the restaurant may have actually had problems which were totally independent of being named the best burger in America. But it’s a really interesting piece about the quest for authenticity. Authentic experience and how much people in the Instagram age how much people want to make a checkbox make a bucket list of 0 I the best burger in America and the complexity of that. So check out the story and thrill us. I found the best burger in America.


S4: That is our show for today the Gabfest is produced by Joslyn Frank who was busy in Washington D.C. today which is so exciting for me. Jocelyn has grown four inches taller since she’s moved to the Midwest. Our researcher is Bridget Dunlap.


S3: You should follow us on Twitter at Slate gab fest and you should tweet conundrums to us and also email conundrums to US deficits icon and come to our conundrum show on December 12th. New York gets its second flash live for Emily Bazelon and John Dickerson. I’m David Plotz. I’m really happy Thanksgiving and we’ll talk to you next week.


S10: Hello. Slate Plus how are you. We are taping on Tuesday before Thanksgiving so you may be listen just after Thanksgiving. If you have Thanksgiving or you may not be listening to it at all although if you’re not listening to it then you’ll never know what we talked about. Riddle me that. The question on the table is is Thanksgiving a liberal or a conservative holiday.


S29: Discuss. Anyone want to take a guess at the right answer.


S5: I’m sorry. This can’t be one where we’re all right. No there’s a right answer. There’s a no it and you are right. I was you I’d just be.


S10: I’m just trying to. Again just to just to get you started.


S9: Well you know and I think maybe follow it accordingly.


S10: OK so the k. All right. I’ll make a case that it’s a very conservative holiday number one it is literally the same meal it is conservative in the sense that it is late.


S5: Number one we stole the country way people stole the country from the Native American Congress self-regulation continue. Wait why.


S24: Appropriation. Why is that. Why is conquest a conservative ideal.


S14: Well it’s become associated with conservatives who seem to be very eager to extend the reign of white people in power in the United States of America. I don’t think originally it was a conservative.


S24: But that’s not a coup but extending the reign of I think. Well I don’t know that I would agree with that but anyway carry on.


S5: Oh yeah. What about Steven Miller and how the white nationalist. Well I don’t think conserve it.


S24: I don’t think conservatives would count him among their number.


S5: So what is this to call him instead. Well it is a kind of concern thinks intrinsically a holiday.


S10: Go ahead you finish.


S7: What. No no. Go ahead.


S10: It is Thanksgiving intrinsically a holiday about cultural appropriation and colonialism and conquest. Or is it about cultural sharing about.


S29: About comedy and alliance and and joining together.


S24: Well in its original conception or in what it has become.


S18: I don’t know how people can separate it.


S24: Well because Jefferson because George Washington and Lincoln I mean in the Proclamation in 1863 it’s basically about giving thanks to God. And that was true for Washington too. So it’s basically it’s a religious holiday.


S14: So which is a bummer for Jews at least for me because we appreciate that it’s like a secular holiday that we get to Sharon and we don’t have to feel left out from which is kind of the experience of Christmas which is OK. Well Christmas I just don’t get to participate in it.


S11: Well unless you think it’s the same God.


S10: Well I’ll go. But if you don’t worship a god. Yeah. That’s that does it. That’s. But but but but actually. But I don’t think that Lincoln’s proclamation binds me. I don’t think that Lincoln’s proclamation determines how people celebrate. You know but I mean if Thanks but I think I don’t think we’re required to think of it as giving thanks to God today.


S7: Right. But you were. But I’m looking for the definition of what the giving of thanks is for. So we w if you take the super literal then that’s one thing but then when it’s become because there’s the super little then there’s the like textbook Elementary School in McLean Virginia where it’s like this Kumbayah with the Native Americans where we’re not taking anything from and Squanto helped the Pilgrims build that make their crops arrive Ren had dinner with them. Yeah it’s a huge bipartisan party where everybody’s giving and nobody’s stepping on anybody’s toes and it’s all great. And then there is the more general kind of I think two version of what Emily saying about which is this is the one holiday that kind of it’s a secular and religious can join in it or in a celebration of America because of the ridiculous both commercialization and politicization of Christmas but also.


S14: And I love Thanksgiving I’m not going to stop loving Thanksgiving like everything else in American history when you start digging into the foundation of it you find racism like you find really problematic relationships among native peoples and the white people who showed up from Europe like that’s just a fact of it and you know the Native Americans I don’t know maybe. Guess OK. They helped grow crops but they also like died of smallpox and got killed.


S10: Right. But that right. Right of course. And it is it but what is the stance towards that. I think with Columbus Day everyone stances like well everyone the left stance is Oh man we got to ditch this holiday. It’s a dog of a holiday don’t think people feel that way about Thanksgiving. But why not.


S13: Well although although clearly I’m sure some people some people feel that so many different meanings and it’s so woven into the fabric of our calendar and our social policy right it’s like would be too threatening to try to dislodge Thanksgiving. And I’m not suggesting we do. I do think though that pretending it doesn’t have this complicated history is ever a mistake.


S29: I yeah I don’t know if that’s conservative or liberal. I don’t know. I guess I don’t feel like I have to spend all time I mean it seems to me that it’s a it’s a holiday about my eyes.


S26: You’re too busy.


S6: No it’s true it’s like you’re busy you’re too busy giving thanks for the chance to spend time with all these wonderful cousins and family and to be together with them and that. That to me. I don’t. I actually spent no time thinking about Thanksgiving as a historical holiday or that beet was born.


S13: You never read a single article about Native Americans feeling like distressed about Thanksgiving and had like find a find yourself moved in some way.


S10: But I have never read it. I think the Americans I’ll send them America’s history towards Native Americans is appalling. But that particular. No I do I read about Thanksgiving as the exemplar of it.


S29: No because Thanksgiving seemed to me like a really really small minor piece of a act of you know conquest and and criminal you know criminal cruelty and genocide.


S9: Well sure. But it but Thanksgiving doesn’t seem like central to it.


S13: Yeah but it’s also a holiday that people experience differently based on their relationship to that history and I have definitely read and talked to Native Americans who feel like very ambivalent or upset about it. And so in that sense like it’s not truly inclusive like everything. And you know a little bit of grappling with that phrase do right.


S10: It’s not a universal holiday. It’s also I think that to me what’s conservative about it. And in both in good and bad ways as I was saying like it’s the same. You eat is literally conservative in the sense that it’s it is it’s repetitious. It is you do the same thing. Whereas most other holidays I think independence day there are many different ways to celebrate Independence Day. And many legit different ways to celebrate Independence Day or Labor Day and even Christmas. There are not that many ways to celebrate Thanksgiving that are authorized. Well they’re there. People have a kind of very narrow sense of how you do it. And that’s a conservative idea. It’s it’s not also you have to do it. Sorry John one at one point and it is very hard almost all Thanksgiving is oriented around the family. It’s harder. There are of course people millions of people who celebrate with families they’ve chosen rather than families. They were there their birth families and. And I think and I imagine they have wonderful happy Thanksgivings but it’s very central to the idea Thanksgiving is that you’re doing it with the family you. You come from. And for a lot of people that’s miserable.


S24: Oh I wonder if that’s okay. I find it to be a much more broad definition of family. But maybe that’s my own maybe that’s my own view. You know what I wonder is is whether because you because we all have personal experiences with Thanksgiving each year it becomes whatever our personal feeling is about it. And that’s what allows a person to detach it from this notion of Thanksgiving and Native Americans. The thing about the Thanksgiving Native Americans is like that’s look like a marketing thing which is separate and apart from where it actually came from. I mean so Washington Lincoln I don’t think you mentioned the Native Americans at all like it was a. So so it has. There’s kind of a schoolhouse rock part of it that has morphed into this relationship with the Native Americans of course.


S10: And again I don’t know if this makes it liberal or conservative maybe doesn’t matter. I mean what is what is great about it. Maybe this is what makes it liberal is that it is not religious in a meaningful way. It’s not. It’s not sectarian religious and that is not materialistic.


S8: Yes. Well it’s hedonistic in the sense of I eat so much pie and I mean so but it’s not. You don’t have to come bearing gifts which is a relief for those of us who are bad at that job.


S7: To your conservative point David it it it highlights that that it must be the same every year like it’s obsessive about the traditions.


S14: I guess for people with their sources roast turkey on every Sunday I even do like but is not a lot of people’s favorite food and sure of a stultifying can’t.


S9: David hates because he I hate ballet. I w..


S20: I’ve got to I’ve got to cook this stupid Turkey for the first time in years. Tomorrow or Thursday.


S13: So it’ll be great. Pour some cider on it. That’s my own little tip and it’s roasting.


S17: But that’s my point like everybody is forced to eat this thing that is not probably on their top five list or 10 list.


S12: Even during the rest of time well like turkey. Yeah.


S10: Yeah there’s definitely. Definitely not top down. Good point. OK. All right. Well may your May your Thanksgiving be the joyous Slate Plus hours. Talk to you next week. Bye bye.


S19: My God that reminded me that I need your mom’s milk up high last year and it was a big hit and I had forgotten that I did that and now I probably am going to be asked to do it again. And I did not buy any of the ingredients or think about it for one second.


S10: I made it because it is the greatest.


S14: Was really good and now I’m going to have to figure out world how to do about the fat. Let’s do both. I have no plans to make it again. Maybe I’ll go buy some ingredients.


S22: OK. All right.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for September 19th 2019 the Twin Cities edition the gab fest is like before a packed house at the Fitzgerald Theater in St. Paul Minnesota. We expected quiet politeness Minnesota nice. The quiet stillness of a night ice fishing under the stars.


S3: And instead we have the raucous brain crazed crazed prairie mosh pit style.


S4: I’m David Plotz about Lois Obscura. On my far left the man who only came to Minnesota because he thought it was Iowa.


S5: And fortunately he is. He’s so blonde that he fits right in here.


S6: CBS News is CBS 60 Minutes. Excuse me John Dickerson.


S7: You know. You know I went to camp here in business camp Mishawaka.


S8: So yeah. So.


S9: Camp Mr. walk in the house. Yeah. All right. Yes. So.


S10: I’m just saying.


S11: Got deep roots in this community wants to do an interview in the mall. Does that count. You did an interview at a mall. Yeah. Yeah. You know there there are malls outside of Minnesota. Yeah but this mall not Mall of America. It’s true.


S4: There is only one mall America about but over it I made a lanyard that is that other voice of course is a woman who eats her salad with a comb and her steak with a samurai sword. Emily Barth one of the New York Times Magazine and Yale University. Law.


S3: On today’s fest.


S4: Will it take a Democrat with decent Midwestern values to be Trump or can a coastal socialist elitist. Do it instead. Then the rise of the chaos voter is America in deep trouble because we’re suddenly overrun with nihilistic crazy voters who want to burn it all down. Ben when it comes to writing fiction about politics the best there is is the Twin Cities own Curtis Sittenfeld we will talk about how to turn real political lives and real political wives into novels. And plus we will have cocktail chatter.


S12: We are coming to you from the heart of club our country the beating heart of the CLO bankruptcy the argument of her struggling campaign is that she is from a place that is the middle not just geographically but ideologically and that only by nominating someone with those qualities those credentials will the Democrats win the 2020 presidential elections so John. Is she right about that. I heard someone say no already.


S13: That’s a tough hometown crowd. She can. She can’t even get in a man in her in her own pews. Well I’m sorry. I’m sorry Senator it’s.


S7: And she so she won by a landslide here. Well.


S14: Outperform. You know the old expression no one says as Coase the Minnesota Senate race so goes the presidency.


S13: That’s true that has not worked out. Yes folks Fritz Mondale would beat Humphrey to.


S15: A heat I would. What you you want. You’re. I mean he did weigh in. So there you go. There’s an answer to your question. First of all by the way can I say you mentioned you made reference to the New York Times story about their eating salad with a with a comb. Creative solutions for emergency situations.


S16: I mean what else does a priest know this story is about upbraiding a staff member for not having a fork and we are trying to make a dumb joke.


S14: I’m sorry.


S7: You know I’m very literal and I don’t get the punch line out. I was so literal minded.


S14: I just think a candidate who has emergency solutions for mean solutions for emergency moments is important. OK. Well this is the great question in the race because what everybody is trying to figure out is what’s the shape of the electorate can look like four for the Democrats to win the nomination and then I mean and then in the general election what’s the Coalition going to look like. And then is that coalition movable is it. Is it a campaign about persuasion or is it a campaign about motivation just your base and the answer is that it’s both. But there is a big debate about among the liberal side of the Democratic Party that says we need the kind of enthusiasm that Donald Trump is able to bring out in his party and only through an enthusiastic appearance by the left. Will we be able to win. Other people say well if you look at the states that in the electoral map Wisconsin Minnesota Michigan Pennsylvania Ohio Iowa even if those two those two may already be off the map they have a disproportionate share of white working class voters in the Democratic Party which has had struggle with them since FDR still needs to be able to capture those kinds of voters. This is the big tension in the party and what interests me is that what this requires is a lot of Democrats to basically do punditry about their neighbors. What do I mean 88 percent of Democrats say they would vote for a woman to be president but only 44 percent of Democrats think other Democrats would do that. So there we know that electability is the number one thing that Democrats care about. So they have to basically be pundits about their neighbor. We as Emily going to vote for a woman well I don’t know if she is. And then that that determines my vote if I’m a Democrat. And so that gets into very sticky territory when it comes to these questions. What’s the shape of the electorate. Will the traditional Democratic coalition turn out. And are we as or are Democrats trying to convince new voters or just wrap up their existing ones. So Emily two club stars obviously struggling but but Biden who’s like Old Man Club star in the in the moderate accommodationist wing.


S12: Is doing just fine. It’s he.


S4: I mean is he doing just fine for for the some of the reasons John talked about that Democrats believe that a return to normalcy is possible or because people think he’s the only one who can win or because low information voters are stuck on him or because he’s a great candidate.


S17: I mean all the above except I don’t think we have a lot of evidence for the last possibility. I mean what that is we keep waiting for him. Right. I think it would be great for the party if he was a great candidate and I don’t think he’s bombed out as I think we predicted before he got in the race because he has been such a lousy candidate in previous presidential cycle 21 weeks before Iowa.


S16: Yeah there’s a long way to go. Right. Right. I do think that his appeal has to do with other people’s perception of who could get elected I don’t think that’s crazy. I mean is this fundamental you can be as feminist as they get and still think is it possible that Elizabeth Warren or Kamala Harris could actually win. And do you want to take a risk this time around given what happened to Hillary Clinton. Like if a woman gets nominated and loses. Is that going to be it for my lifetime. I wonder about that.


S12: You know it’s you really do you really sit and wonder and think. Well I’m maybe I should support a man because of that.


S16: I don’t think about it in that terms for myself but I don’t.


S18: I do think there is a tension between our ideals about how gender and race and other immutable characteristics elegant legal term should play and then how we think they actually do play. And I don’t think it’s wrong to be asking those questions and trying to pull for that issue and I also think when I was writing about Warren and following her around she has this teacher leeway about her that some people really cotton to and other people find off putting and I don’t think you can separate the fact that she’s a woman from the way in which that plays to different audiences.


S14: One thing that’s been interesting is the shape of the race where it is right now there’s a Wall Street Journal NBC poll that just came out and 70 percent of Democrats say you’ll be fine if she was the nominee. That’s the highest of all of them. She has increased that number.


S19: She’s. So that’s something.


S13: Yes and no Democrat.


S14: I have no idea what it says but it’s it’s because. And Kamala Harris his numbers have gone south hard so what the NBC poll shows is Biden’s at 31. And I believe as History warns at 26 and Sanders is at 13 or 14. Harris has gone from 13 down to like five. She’s really taken a hit which is interesting and I’m not sure why you guys may have thoughts but what it feels like is is that Vice President Biden has a snowball in his hands and it’s it’s spring and he’s got to keep it alive until July. And and and Elizabeth Warren who’s got a plan for everything had 20000 people shopping in in in New York for her and her anti-corruption speech that she gave this week is creating like I mean she’s rubbing her hands together she’s like I have opened in the shade they airplane by flower and its waiting to blossom.


S20: Like she’s got the thing in her hand leave the better for John they could still hear her say well.


S7: But the thing is that he’s got the snowball and so she’s trying to create heat and that would make the snowball melt. So flour does respond.


S21: Now does it buy it.


S22: So all I can say is damn Snowball has melted now.


S16: No I liked her snowball metaphors. I said. Why does it matter what who Democrats will vote for and what Democrats think is going to happen as opposed to the whole electorate. Well they don’t know that answer.


S14: Well that’s the question whether you believe that the electorate is basically split. We’re so partisan there’s nobody in the middle anymore and it’s just all about turning out your team. And then there’s a new thing now and we’ll get to this in the chaos topic. But you know negative partisanship is is is more powerful now than ever before. So it ends up being basically you don’t vote for your person but against the other person. So how will that play and how do people anticipate that happening. Obviously Democrats have a big turnout benefit in Donald Trump but he has a turnout benefit with with think that whoever wins the presidency will win with zero independent votes.


S7: That seems well. Well we don’t even know when word the it’s really are anymore independent voters there a lot or two ever. Oh yeah don’t we care what we want to know what they think.


S14: Well this is the question a Who are they where do they live and how many of them are there because if they live in states that don’t matter they don’t man.


S17: That’s true I was going to say there are a lot of them in my standing right.


S7: And then the question is are they people who. So you are a state kind of matter. Oh yeah yeah definitely. But there’s no independents here. They’re all like they’re all DFL or they’re well oh white nationalist.


S13: You say that it’s drag for Labor in this drop in DFL nice. The. The great names like Holland.


S14: Here’s the thing though. Yeah. The question is OK. Let’s say you’re so suburban women will be something that people pay a lot of attention to because suburban Republican women traditionally vote Republican might vote for Donald Trump cause they’re worried about the Supreme Court are not going to vote from this time. So are they going to stay home or are they going to turn out and vote for the Democrat. Those are. So the question is then how many of those are around and what is staying home mean versus voting for a Democrat. What’s what’s the hurdle. And then also there’s an Andrew Yang Fan out in the in the stands. And then And then there’s the question the White where the white working class voter for Democrats today. Are they pulling over those voters who voted for Obama and then for Trump is that a big enough group is that in these states or is that a shiny object that shouldn’t be chased. Because you’ll end up losing voters in another part of coalition that you need. All these are open questions and the thing is the punditry matters because it’s turning how people are making their sorting decision.


S4: But I also think you left one out which is will African-American voters and in key states turn out in numbers the way they did 100 percent.


S23: I haven’t seen Warren really catch up with those votes but he’s at 13 percent in the year in the Journal poll and an Obama with 40 slightly ahead.


S24: But when when but if she’s the nominee is that going to sure stick. Well I just had to do to ask is more specific question do you Emily think this is already a two person race.


S12: Is this already a Warren Biden race and all and even Sanders is now really trailing far behind in his dinghy.


S16: I’ve always been skeptical that Sanders could really grow his support. I don’t like actually using grow as a verb in the way I just did. Sorry about that your previous metaphor is withering as you speak.


S25: Right away. I.


S18: Was skeptical. I’ve always been skeptical that Sanders could really vastly increase his support like he has a super committee base. I see you out there. We neglected you in the last election cycle. I feel regretful about that.


S16: And yet I remain skeptical though I really appreciate his presence on the debate stage. I think that if Biden stumbles somebody else is going to be a real contender in this race. I kind of think it would be but judge probably well.


S10: I think it’s two person John we got so much time now. No I mean but that’s the shift.


S14: I mean I think there are probably two lanes and so right now you’ve got it in the in the liberal lane four and the moderate lane you’ve got the two people in that’ll be what it allowed to come down to. It’ll be interesting to see how the sorting takes place between Sanders and Warren. A lot of Sanders voters and I know this because of the embedded CBS care accordion and I were just talking about this. They have. And she spends all her time with them.


S17: I don’t bet that means the reporter who had.


S14: Yeah well I don’t want to campaign because when I was one of those and I was out there all the time I would hate when people would pretend they had been when they hadn’t been so I need to give credit to the person who’s out there doing the reporting not the person who isn’t. Which is to say me. Nevertheless I have a microphone in front of me and can’t anyway what she was saying. Is that is that that Sanders voters have a passion and affection for him that is necessarily a transfer. Yeah. And or and or right. Known as surge miserable. And what’s going to make it transfer and what does that look like and when does it happen. Because if you’re if you’re any kind of candidate you want something for your transfer of voters or affection.


S17: So of course this could turn. I think Sanders and Warren are playing very nice with each other in a way that suggests actually some depth of allegiance and loyalty as opposed to something that’s more surface level and could disintegrate at the time.


S14: Well and also as he as he said when I when I interview him I did actually do as he said I’ve known her for 30 years. And I’m not going to. Here’s also another thing. So say things go south for one of the two of them. Do they make a do they join forces and basically say that we need to combine and and go after the the moderate or whoever’s in that lane. Presumably it’s Biden but could be Buda Georgia could be clever Cha too.


S4: Do you think Emily that there the Democrats are positioning themselves on issues in a way that’s going to be productive for the general. We see this sort of now aborted port push on Cavett can I ask my question. No no no. The aborted push on Cavett on impeachment the general push on impeachment.


S26: Warren has made this very interesting corruption attack that I think that that polls really well so that does that feel to you like the the main the main front the main way to to win in 2020 or do you have a sense about what they should be doing that would help them in the general.


S18: I think I mean this is I’m just kind of going off of the polls here and other people who look at the polls. But I think when you look at economic issues the way Warren is framing them yes that looks like a good argument to me it directly goes after the same discontent that Donald Trump has successfully gone after it’s populist. But it’s taking the target of the populism as like America’s corporate fat cats. It’s addressing inequality. She has it really. I think she’s very good at explaining what she thinks has gone wrong with the economy since 1980. And I think that’s compelling.


S14: But there are other things that I don’t think what if it’s right what if the election is more about identity and those kinds of issues and not an intellectual case about the sharing the wealth and when you shared prosperity what mean.


S23: I mean voters that went to liberal Harvard professor elite. Yes yes. So you’re saying Trump will try to make it about that if she’s the general election candidate. I mean the thing about Warren is that she actually is from Oklahoma and grab.


S14: But when you get into identity fights it’s not like well actually I’m from. I


S16: mean she tells all those stories. I mean she’s made that very central. And you know whether that is enough to combat the fact that yes she did work at Harvard I’m not sure. But she has an actual true organic response to those attacks.


S14: Here’s one thing I wonder about responding to those attacks and how it’s going to take place and what forum and what one does as a candidate who we know that Donald Trump is going to get the nomination of his own party or we assume barring some crazy event. So today he passed on along a tweet about Congresswoman alone Omar that said that she was dancing on 9/11. OK. It was a smear she was she wasn’t. Hit when he passed along that tweet. This is by the way the president of the United States. He said this is the new Democratic Party. So this is. This is super obvious right. Yeah. This is is this is. So this is negative partisanship. This is basically create an image of the opposite party that is that is so objectionable. You won’t from a vote for them and a lie. Sounds like right. So my point is if that is where we are and it’s where what data we September 18th imagine the escalation. How do you think about that in terms of a candidate who is in the opposite party bonding to something at that level.


S16: I mean whoever the nominee is is going to face this. It’s not going to matter. And so I think to be scared off from a more liberal candidate for that reason is a mistake. I don’t think that Biden is necessarily going to be more effective at responding to that. I mean. One thing. Biden has his strengths and I’m happy to lay them out. But when I was listening to the word salad.


S6: Problematic answer he gave with which you can with which he in the car. That’s what I’m talking about.


S17: When I was listening to that store that answer he gave about response to segregation which just went all over the place. I thought Oh my God. Can you imagine the debates between Trump and Biden.


S16: There’s gonna be right. They’re gonna insult each other and then they’re going to like both of them. They’re both likely Daddy like it’s just going to be this really weird combination of nastiness and like wandering into the wilderness. Answer.


S15: Well you know and here’s an interesting maybe signage in question but it’s one on my mind.


S14: Will the when people are in the desert when people in the Democratic Party are thinking about who their nominee is going to be and what they’re going to need to do against the likely Republican nominee do they think about it in terms of the debate stage context because turns out debates don’t actually affect the I think. Or do they think about it in another context. NJ and should that change the way they think about the candidate.


S16: Yeah I. That’s a really good question. Can I ask you a different policy question. So as long as I get to answer with a question no no. I’m Alice David. So here’s my question to either or both of you.


S18: So in my mind the weakness right now among the liberal Democrats is support for Medicare for all because the idea of forcing people onto government run health care that costs 30 trillion dollars is not popular. The public option the idea of choice strengthening Obamacare Medicaid for all or some possibility of Medicare yes. But the the Bernie version which is in four years we end private health insurance is not popular.


S16: So what’s if Warren is the candidate. What’s she going to do. She’s sticking to that position more than I expect.


S14: Although in this strange way where she’s sticking with it but not saying I mean she says I’m on his plan but then had that she never answers to Shelly Shelly done that on the tax on the last question is she leaving herself room to say something like Oh we’ll get there eventually or not I’m sure.


S12: Sure and I think that as long as the Republicans do things where they’re going after Obamacare which they seem to be doing with legal challenges the Democrats that’s a stronger issue for Democrats and Republicans than you don’t have to pin yourself to that.


S16: I think she has pinned herself to it more than I would have expected and the people at the last debate sorry to be so debate centric who gave the best answers were Kamala Harris and Pete booted Judge Harris brought up the lawsuit you just mentioned you know against to bring down Obamacare. But it just says I trust Americans why can’t we have choice for all.


S13: Yeah. So the question is go ahead you’re going to plod for Emily for Mayor Pete from here Pete. Emily you can play for everyone. This is America. Blood for yourself. Yes. Congratulations. Congratulations everyone.


S14: The thing that that is interesting to me about about Medicare for all. First of all you know we did the polling for it is highly volatile so people in theory like it and then once you start saying what’s in it they’d favored it drops like a rock. So that’s one problem. The second thing is in the context of a general election what is the value argument behind that. That a Democratic nominee is going to use assuming they they are in support of that to make a larger case to the public like is it we don’t think 30 million people should be without health care. Do we think your costs are too much and your one illness away from bankruptcy. Do we think 146 million people on private insurance should have a new complexity in their life.


S15: What is that. No. So might might what interests me is whatever the set of policy proposals are that a Democrat runs on.


S14: It seems to me that that the only person who has you mentioned Kamala Harris she was able to take the issue and make it about President Trump. That seems to me to be the thing that a Democrat needs to do and in the context of all the health care debate almost none of them have done that successfully in a way that has real throw weight in a general election and seems to me if you can’t do that you’re not ready for the general election.


S27: Slate Plus members you get bonus segments on the gab fest and other Slate podcasts in today’s Slate Plus segments are going to be the Q and A with our audience here in the Twin Cities. So


S28: go to Slate dot com slash gap us plus to become a member.


S29: All right. All right.


S30: All right dear Minnesotans I’m going to read you some statements and I want you to let me know if you agree with them by applauding if you do OK. I fantasize about a natural disaster wiping out most of humanity such that a small group of people can start over.


S31: I think society should be burned to the ground.


S4: When I think about our political and social institutions I cannot help thinking just let them all burn.


S30: We cannot fix the problems in our social institutions. We need to tear them down and start over.


S4: Sometimes I just feel like destroying beautiful things. That’s.


S32: The least appealing.


S30: So an astonishing percentage of Americans believe some of these statements 40 percent according to a recent study believe that we need society B society to be burned to the ground.


S12: This was found by three social scientists two Danish one American I like to have two Danish for breakfast and the paper is called a need for chaos the sharing of hostile political rumors and advance democracy. Tom Edsel the New York Times wrote a very interesting column about that and we’re going to couple that today with another social science paper called Democracy devouring itself the rise of the incompetent citizen and the appeal of right wing populism. And the reason we’re talking about that is these two papers taken together painted truly dire Dreier dire picture of where we are as a country. And they suggest that the United States and in fact possibly all democracies are even in worse shape than we suspected. So Emily may I ask you I mean if I could do this but what did this need for chaos paper find why is it so unsettling.


S16: So I have to say I think that the so I read this like 10 times like 40 percent of people agreed to this and then I decided that if you look at those questions closely. OK. If you answer them literally and you’re talking about actually burning things to the ground that’s bad. But I bet a lot of people I mean I could imagine this answered them much more in this way of like yeah I’m mad about some stuff and this is a flawed world and rig the system we lived it we live in. And and when you think about it that way it’s not as alert.


S12: OK. But can I describe what the study found.


S16: Yeah. Well what it found was that these folks like are really prevalent in those numbers you said. But that also they are likely to be spreading information on social media that social media has. This is so this is this big question is social media changing the way people communicate in a way that then takes these fringe views or are these disordered blow everything up views and allows them to spread and gain political influence in a way that is destabilising for the democracy. The counter view is like there’s nothing new about this. We’ve always had rumors. We’ve always had disinformation. The fact that they’re spreading more gets exaggerated that when you look at people’s news consumption almost everybody is actually looking at multiple news stories and news sources including mainstream ones. And we’re too concerned about pizza gate and a few of and you know the Sandy Hook libelous lies. And that we should stop obsessing about this because it doesn’t actually make that big an effect. And there are political scientists on both sides.


S7: All right. Well there’s a lot going on here. All right.


S30: I’m going to take the side which is that people who want to burn it all down are very dangerous.


S24: So that what this this study these these political scientists found was that when you look at sort of how disinformation spreads it’s not necessarily spread by people have a partisan motivation not necessarily people who are who like are spreading it because they want to take down the Democratic candidate the Republican candidate. It’s spread by people who want to take down the institutions themselves. They do not believe the institution they want to increase chaos in the system and that there has been a market increase in the amount of chaos in the system because the ability of people to spread this information has grown the number of people who believe in spreading this information has grown and it’s quite dangerous and the elites and coupled with this other paper which sort of said the elites have lost control of instability the elites have lost control of media they’ve lost control of politics they’ve lost control of the kind of master narrative of society and that you we are in a situation where the kind of nihilist destructive anarchic forces that these folks believe in have overtaken us and there is no way to bring them back in.


S10: There’s no way to rein them in right. So there’s a lot of it. So.


S14: One thing one thing is that the pizza gate and the most extreme stories and conspiracy theories that exist on both the left and the right are only a part of the puzzle. What happens when you have chaos voters is they’re happy to see chaos about a whole range of stories. And so it’s not just the ones of the most absurd. But any of the normal conflicts between urban rural religious non religion religious black white. They are happy to see disinformation misinformation create just chaos and cacophony. What that does is so that’s bigger because then that’s people that’s not people who believe there’s a pedophile ring in the bottom of a basement in a basement of a pizza parlor that doesn’t even have a basement. They help keep the noise in the fight. On Twitter social media. And so that’s a bigger group than just the crazies. What that does is it shreds attention just in general. Right. So you now have though that what used to be the as Andy Card the former chief of staff under George W. Bush said is what used to be the fringe is now the rug. Is that the fringe is now in the middle of the conversation. And so it’s harder to get that out of the way and then say OK now I’m just going to focus on this one thing. The other thing that social media is done is the. Something called the illusory truth effect which is once a person who’s mildly into chaos send something out that we know is in bad faith we know is is. I mean the a lot of whom are dancing on 9/11. They know it’s in bad faith. They just don’t give a damn. Once they spread that once that hits you first even the minute when you guys know this. But what even the minute you then are told no that’s not true. The first mover advantage of the false news still sticks in your head. And if the person who is it wants to act in bad faith keeps hammering home the thing that everybody says is a lie and keeps doing it. It sticks in your head and that’s the real danger. So you have chaos voters then you have voters who are anxious to be fed affirmation not information. And I think that creates a much larger portion.


S27: I know you’re but you’re about to jump in because to make one more point about this which is that the so chaos one of the things that that’s paradoxical about Trump is that Trump is an agent of chaos who then offers himself as a solution to chaos. That one of the things he’s been so successful at doing is to create and retweeting this Omar thing is an example of it to create the mistrust and create create the corruption create the anxiety create the fear and then say I am the answer. Only I can fix it. And to do it with authoritarianism as his answer. And so there is a there’s this paradox and Trump which is that he is he claims to be against chaos and yet is an agent of it. And and I think if you look across a bunch of countries if you look in Hungary if you look in Russia if you look in Brazil we have this phenomenon multiplying across the world is the same. So that set of things which is somebody who who posits there’s chaos in society increases the amount of it and then and then comes forward with authoritarian anti-democratic anti representative government solutions to to fix it. And that’s a fucking terrifying place to be. So.


S17: To make the role of the mainstream media to this conversation because if the mainstream media didn’t amplify Yeah the tweets et cetera and spend endless hours debating them on these fake cable news panels and ended up for conflict and treat the news like entertainment then the social media postings would have much less influence.


S16: And the other thing about these chaos voters these kind of Gremlin voters is that you don’t think that’s right.


S24: No I don’t think it’s right. Can I. Can I interrupt and have a conversation is it is that. Yes I mean the mainstream he has totally done that but that’s because the mainstream media is subject to all these forces of fragmentation and loss of audience and and the mainstream what the mainstream media is suffering from is it no longer has the authority it once had. And it’s lost the authority not because it’s it’s covered a lot of tweets. It’s lost the authority because media has itself just turned into this fragmented universe. And and CBS News I mean sorry Jon I note CBS News is wonderful you work for it it’s great CBS News does not have the gravity and weight that it had 10 years ago 30 years ago 60 years ago and it will never get it back. And so I don’t think it’s I don’t think it’s enough to say oh it’s the mainstream media is doing this you know it’s doing the dirty work for the president I think it’s you have to say these forces of fragmentation have have affected the media and government.


S16: Let’s the hawk away too much. Yes there are these market forces is also true that we present ourselves as having some higher authority having some moral compass that guides us having some elevated principles and then we act we in fact often lose the weight we lose the weight not going to let anyone off like that’s wrong but I especially feel this about television.


S4: No it’s a it’s a small fraction of people who are what it’s like cable news and that’s a small fraction of audience and you’re talking about Fox which is one of these agents of fragmentation.


S7: No actually it’s a real vision across the well or it and to some degree in newspapers and yeah we don’t need to do is to broaden it even more Yeah we can. Well so you know institutional legitimacy for anything anymore right but that’s because we are so hand right over and I mean we haven’t handed it over. Yes we know we have. We have.


S33: No no. This is something we haven’t had handed a mirror.


S15: It’s contributory.


S14: It’s not it’s not just a single it’s it’s it’s exactly the complexity that you talk about but but but as Emily said whether it’s the New York Times or CBS or Time magazine or any of those legacy big organizations that spend a lot of time making sure that their standards their job in part is to fight against. Now they’re businesses. So they have to have people at church.


S24: It’s the church U.S. Senate it’s the House of Representatives. It’s every major every its universities every significant institution this country has much less credibility than it did a year ago or 10 years ago right.


S16: Every single one but not to the people but that we have no responsibility for responsibility for and universities also have.


S14: Right right. So and also most of those institutions that you named still have people inside them who say that we still believe in our existing and original standards and we’re going to fight against these forces and we shouldn’t let those dark forces of darkness prevail even if some of them are coming from within our own house. And we have to keep those standards because without standards it’s madness. And so that’s.


S16: Also to the Gremlin voters that’s now I’m thinking of them. So I I guess I think they’re surely there are some people who are like you know cackling over burning down the world. I I in my gut feel like there are more people who just feel like no matter what I do my life doesn’t change and get better. These politicians they yap about solutions. It doesn’t matter. And I see this kind of entertainment faux news that you know particularly Trump has been so so good at promoting and peddling and I’m just going to like laugh at it because there is no point in really paying attention to this game. My life hasn’t changed enough et cetera. Well let’s say most people are correct but I don’t think there is. I don’t think that is a crazy view in itself at all.


S14: Well and it’s not just I mean this president has taken the link ever since basically candidates used the same processes that are used to sell lemon fresh pledge or any other consumer product. It has been on a straight trajectory to creating a situation where people feel like I’m being gamed the way I’m gamed to buy mud flaps on the new car. And so once that happens you bait it detaches from what’s happening in their real lives. That’s been going on before Trump people obviously do it now which is why it’s so great it’s so striking that politicians who in any party the way you change that is you inspire people. Is that you create these fires inside of each. Each voter Bye bye kindling something in them that they feel in a common way that then brings them and lifts them through whatever it is that you appeal to them. And it’s. And the paucity of inspirational speech in politics is striking. I mean that because that’s the only way you can beat it.


S4: I don’t I I think that is just I mean really idealistic in a way that doesn’t resonate. I think when you have had the inequality that you have when you have a lack of a shared you know commonality a shared sense of what the country is a lack of a shared sense of mission of the country the idea that political rhetoric is going to overcome these enormous political economic you know social religious cultural forces seems hopeless.


S14: Well so you’re right. No it’s obviously not just rhetoric. But if you’re going to do it you have to. So clearly we’ve been at worst places than this. We did have a civil war and you know 600000 people died. So we’ve been in worse places. And the the sense one example that’s literally the one.


S7: Sorry. Well yeah. Anyway 1968 things were a lot worse. Is worse than 60. Well whether it was 1968 was pretty bad. You had the National Guard. You were born dying it.


S15: Was always just people getting shot in major cities you know Jersey City thirty people dying Detroit 36 people dying like you we don’t yet have that.


S30: So we have we have got massacres we do massacre.


S34: It’s different it’s different You’re sure. But El Paso you like that’s a political shoot and you have Bobby Kennedy and and Martin Luther King I’m saying that that was 1968 was pretty tough year.


S14: So my point is that there have been worse there no politics was a lot different back then.


S17: You don’t have the structural things in place that would create correction that you had that you don’t have air locks in a different way you had authoritative news sources that had more write a greater share of the market than you got that a greater share because you didn’t.


S14: There were people I mean certainly if you look at the Wallace candidacy and you look even at the Goldwater candidacy there were a lot of people supporting those two candidacies who felt that these shared facts were all made up right. They didn’t make an organizing principle right or the left or the under which goes back to David’s point about the case voter voters one of the things that this paper finds and that is true is that there is a convening force of social media that they didn’t have in 64 in 68 and that is and that is what makes this different now and makes it much much harder to beat back with rhetoric because you’re did you’re immediately atomized unless you can kindle something in individual Americans and to suggest that they’re that that Americans across the country are so barren that they can’t be moved.


S16: That’s than to move people with the results. I mean I think Mitch McConnell while I wouldn’t give him the inspiring award when he personally when he emphasizes look we’ve gotten one hundred and fifty judges confirmed that is a real legacy a real accomplishment for his party that that should move his base.


S14: Right. Right. But they’re in control. This is this is a very problem.


S16: McKnight Sure. Yes yes. And it also goes to the fact that the Democrats trying to investigate and take testimony seems pretty ineffectual at this point. Now maybe there is nothing that can be done about that these subpoenas are in court in this kind of months long way but it feels like hey you know you said you were gonna go get Trump’s tax returns. Where are they. Like they’re the use of the house as a you’re in control. I don’t feel like we’re seeing a whole lot of fruits of that labor.


S12: Gabfest fans we are so happy to have Curtis Sittenfeld with us here in the Twin Cities.


S4: Curtis is the author of five novels and one amazing collection of short stories Her novels include prep eligible which is a retelling of pride and prejudice. American wife which is a fictionalized biography of Laura Bush. Her short story collection you think it. I’ll say it is amazing. It’s just so good. I read that has been adapted for television.


S35: True true it should be true less or less true than it once was. That’s something that happens totally shut it up that I will watch. Thank you. Thank you.


S4: For our purposes Curtis is also the American novelist who is most attentive and best at writing about politics. American wife is a masterpiece she also wrote a serialized novella about the Obama inauguration for me at Slate back in 2009.


S9: But you’ve forgotten that. I wondered if you had.


S20: You and I are the only ones and we were the ones who read it. It’s been read.


S4: She wrote a short story about Hillary Clinton for Esquire and also for her collection. And now we still are beating heart. She is working on a book with the working title of Rodham. It’s about what that’s about and about what if Hillary had a human right on the bill at Yale Law School and the way she really did. They’d fallen in love but she hadn’t married him and had gone on to lead a life apart from his SO.


S30: I. I am so excited to read this book which we will get a chance to read next year at some point. Curtis you tweeted this week you had a great tweet this week. I seriously think today anyway that I may have written the great American novel you might not realize it because I’m female and because the cover will probably be either a dress or a woman whose face you can’t see so this just isn’t. This is just an F Y.


S19: Off. So why why are you so excited about it. Why are you so excited about running.


S36: Well so I I I first of all she has to finish it. It’s a good I know that it is. It’s funny because I think that when I tweeted that and I can understand why in retrospect people thought I was completely finished with the book which I would say I actually am 90 percent finished.


S37: But you all know there’s a difference between being 90 percent finished writing your book and 100 percent. I think I had. So there have been moments when I’ve thought like this is not coming together as I had imagined this is I’ve been working on it for two and a half years and I think I will say yesterday I was having a day where I thought oh my god like it’s even better than I hoped.


S38: So you know celebrate this day. How do you get there.


S15: Does that rollercoaster go like this or does it go like the EKG chart.


S39: Well so I actually feel like the general rule I think is that if you feel like you had a great day of writing you and then you look back at each piece you’re usually wrong. And if you feel like you had a really terrible day and you look back you also are probably like that. Well I was going to say you’re right. But.


S38: I think that it’s less.


S37: I mean again there are times when I’ll and I wrote I mean I know this is in the year 2019. Some people have. Some of us have lost our attention span so I know this is a little bit daunting but it might be like a five hundred ish page. There’s there’s a lot to say about if Hillary hadn’t married Bill. It turns out. Yeah. And but yeah I think that part of being a novelist is just sort of getting to the other side of that almost no one writes novel novels about politicians or.


S4: And no one bright spot was about first ladies you’re now going to have written two novels about first ladies sort of because of course if Hillary hadn’t.


S9: Yeah yeah but you know what I’m saying here. I did what. Why. What are you why are you drawing.


S12: Why were you drawn to Laura Bush where you’re drawn to Hillary Clinton.


S39: So I think it I think it’s fair to see a pattern although I would say like my interest in Hillary Clinton is more as like the first female major party nominee for president. That’s sort of the category I see here rather than as primary.


S17: Who are you. She doesn’t marry Bill. You’ve actually converted.


S14: So you’re saying David’s defining her merely by her husband and not by her own achievements.


S38: I think I think it’s I mean she isn’t she.


S39: Well actually there are two things that sort of made me really prompted me to write the novel. One was when Esquire reached out and said Do you want to write a short story. This was in early 2016 and they said Do you wanna write a story from the perspective of Hillary Clinton. And the funny thing was I had been invited because of my book American Wife. I had been invited to write a few essays about Hillary Clinton and I had said no thank you like during the 2016 election leading up to it. I feel like almost nothing can be written about like who Hillary Clinton is to the American public that hasn’t already been said but to think like what does Hillary think of us is a completely different question like What does the world look like to her not not what do we think of her but what does she think of us. The other thing that I had this sort of slow realization is leading up to and after the 2016 election for plenty of grade school children knew Hillary Clinton as the presidential nominee but they actually had no idea who Bill Clinton was let alone that she had been married him and its children.


S38: But it’s in its way it raises this question of if if we had like we’ve been we all experience yet and all that.


S39: Yeah and we’ve there’s this version there’s many things that we’ve been told about her for 30 years. You know some of which have been you know some were true some were false some were sort of true but it’s like if you could strip away a lot. Like I sometimes do think like if she were you know the CEO of a Fortune 500 company or if she were you know like the president of a university and under some very random circumstances I ended up sitting next to her at a dinner party. I think I feel like I’d be like that woman is so smart and interesting and accomplished and instead somehow it’s like I have thoughts about like her headbands from you know 1992 and.


S17: Maybe one of the things I really liked about the Esquire story by the way also the press’s fault.


S14: I mean yes the obsessions with a lot of her and her pantsuits and all that stuff.


S17: And actually that’s like the point of this Esquire story is to write about Hillary’s experience of journalists coming and repeatedly in her life and this invasive way a journalist to yeah reminded me of different people. I was going to say though that Hillary says incredibly bland things in your story even as she’s thinking more interesting thoughts.


S18: And I wonder if that kind of voice and dialogue continues in the novel and that’s hard because when someone land voice or their internal voice of course is fascinating.


S35: But if you can’t keep having to produce these banal political soundbites like how do you deal with Oh no it’s much easier I get it.


S37: I mean first of all you know again we we all including me of course receive her as a public person but before she was a public person you know she was a private and so.


S39: So and that’s kind of in a way to me that’s the appeal of a five hundred page novel that you can like get to the point where the person is a public person but then you also can show them when they’re like 24 or 32 and like maybe with a co-worker with someone they date or someone they have a crush on because I do I do feel like we do a very weird thing where we have this access to kind of like very detailed information about these public figures but then we we sort of pretend that they’re not real three dimensional people like us like we are and they’re not.


S12: Have you met either Hillary Clinton or Laura Bush and would you want to if you haven’t. And have you talked to if you have you talked to them about their fictional selves. So I think the short answer to like almost all those questions is No I.


S37: I.


S16: And I if I were not so sure Laura Bush has read your book she’s a librarian. So people’s.


S40: People have said that.


S41: But I do think she’s so famous that I think that she she had to develop mechanisms for like tuning things out that if if I said like if someone said do you you know Curtis wrote about a book about you Emily maybe you would find it you’re not super famous. I mean your medium fame is spread. Among among sleepless listeners.


S37: Specifically the New York Times readers now so so. So I do think like if I were her I wouldn’t have read it and no I’ve I have never met Hillary can I will say leading up to and then when American way was published since 2008.


S39: I would sometimes dream about Laura Bush and in the dream we were introduced and she knew I had written a novel about her. And she thought it was distasteful but she was too polite to kind of call me out on it.


S38: And I will I. The Laura Bush dreams have gone away.


S41: But I have dreamed a few times.


S14: So do you have. And do you do immerse yourself in Hillary Clinton so that the new character you create grows out of that or is it. Do you recognize two totally separate people when.


S42: Yeah. Actually that’s an excellent question. So I I have immersed myself in Hillary Clinton.


S41: I finished my Hillary Clinton. And I do it. I try to sort of like it like it’s supposed to be a realistic. The premise is supposed to be realistically really what would have happened. And I will say this I’m giving away too much but I’ve had very early readers who have to two of the four Flake and two are like related to me but they’re actually my harshest critics but they’ve said reading the early passages where they found love at Yale Law School like Lick is so convincing that I get upset knowing they’re not going to be together.


S33: And then I reassure myself that they are together and feel like oh my god that seems to be like right where you want to be.


S7: I know I know I know I will say I know we’re at least the great American.


S41: I have gone so far down the rabbit hole that literally this is not a joke. I recently was like like should I moved to Fayetteville Arkansas. It’s actually.


S38: It sounds delightful. And then I got to get out my house and you picked out your house on Zillow or something. So I came to this lovely historic neighborhood. But yeah.


S39: Like Fayetteville I mean so Hillary moved there and in August 1974 when Bill was running for Congress in northwest Arkansas and I again it sounds like a really gray you know like academic sort of hippie like all the liberals in the state go there.


S17: And even though it’s near Boston of Arkansas.


S6: So you have lived I think you’ve lived. You grew up in Cincinnati you’ve lived in Washington Philly St.. St.. LEWIS Now you’re in the Twin Cities. I want you to rank those cities. So I will say this again you know I’m I’ve lived in other places but I have lived in the Midwest for a lot of my life and I I do I feel like it’s really shocking to me that I didn’t know how great the Twin Cities are yet even that there. And.


S37: I swear I’m not just saying as these gets it’s a great lake. There are tons of writers. It’s politically progressive. It’s beautiful like the lakes. It’s it’s actually a great I might have to say that Minneapolis is number one.


S43: Can Wait can I say one other thing because I was listening. I definitely think Elizabeth Warren is electable.


S44: Why do you feel so confident about that.


S17: Someone who’s thought about female politicians.


S37: To me it’s like why isn’t she elected. I like so many things.


S39: It’s like they have to happen and then we know they can happen and it seems like politics is so fluid and and there’s so many things that you know it seems implausible. And then afterwards it seems inevitable. And I also in terms of the thing the thing you guys were saying about Biden like imagining a Biden Trump face off I really sincerely think. And I like Amy Clovis. I like Kamala Harris. I like Elizabeth Warren that like any woman who’s reached the level of success they have has probably withstood a lot more like ugliness and criticism and it’s probably tougher than any man who’s achieved. Drop just drop the mike. Down. Is the author of the forthcoming novel Rodham.


S45: And the author of a whole bunch of other great novels. Curtis thank you for joining us. Thank you.


S3: All right.


S30: Let’s go to cocktail chatter when you’re having one of the very very many craft brewers that this city has had.


S29: What will you be chattering about.


S16: I was tremendously saddened this week by the death of Cokie Roberts who is I mean I feel lucky to think of her as like one of the female journalists I might aspire to be. She seems to be someone who everyone I’ve talked to who has met her thought that she was a lovely person.


S18: She just seems to be one of those Sparky generous presences that even in the cutthroat elbow throwing city of Washington is able to transcend some politics and maybe some of you saw it. There is this amazing photograph circulating this week of Cokie Roberts with Susan Stamberg and Nina Totenberg many years ago. They’re fairly young women. They’re wearing clothes that look very much of that era. And they’re pioneers they are changing the profession. They are these female voices on public radio. Before it was anything like easy to be that person and I feel so grateful to them and all the work they did. It’s just.


S19: The time to think about that. JOHN DICKERSON What’s her chatter.


S14: Amen to that. You know another thing about Cokie is that all the stories you hear or lots and lots of the stories you hear are things she did out of the way people she reached to who were not of her same age and was good to you know you know yeah she’s you want those stories. OK. So as far as all of you know I’m trying to finish a book. Still I’m still trying to finish it. It’s on the presidency and how the job is different than the thing we talk about during the campaigns. And so when during my research I was looking for a book that told people how to prepare to vote not like where to go at the polling place but how to study the issues what to how to think about a president. And turns out there aren’t very many of those books but they’re worth they were written for the elections of nineteen hundred nineteen 0 8 and 1912. I don’t know what happened.


S16: I know what happened in 1984 there on a Ziploc bag.


S10: Well I ordered one of them. It is here tonight in a plastic bag and it smells like your grandmother’s basement because that’s probably where it came from. And it’s called great issues and national leaders live questions of the day discussed the voter’s guide for the campaign of nineteen hundred people. That’s McKinley and that’s where Jennings Bryan. OK. So I opened it and what fell out but this three page little pamphlet. So this to me was more this key word to me was more interesting than the book.


S34: What is the pamphlet. It is the agent’s key to how to sell this book about how to prepare yourself. So awesome. This pamphlet is for your private use. It is the key with which you are to open the door to success in selling this book. No one can succeed at any work without preparation and the more thorough the preparation the better the success we give you this as a guide we advise you to memorize the description word for word. It’s three It’s four pages.


S46: Worth. We advise you to memorize this word for word and that’s distracted in nineteen hundred. They had a lot of time. We advise you to memorize word for word and then beat it.


S15: All you can. But be sure you never do worse. And ladies and gentlemen I tell you that’s just what I’m going to do. Because this is the most complete and in every respect the finest campaign book issued. It is authentic with new and fresh not printed from old plates profusely illustrated with portraits and illustrations so it turns out this is not the actual book. The actual book is 500 pages.


S22: This is a teaser. Okay. So.


S15: And this was this teaser was for. It’s got a cloth covering smell.


S47: Yeah it’s really good. I will turn to it.


S14: But you may you may be we may have a little show and tell. Yeah. And it’ll leave a little mark on your hands anyway. This is it.


S15: This is the teaser. That that this is in the era of do you want to show the class the what the pictures are like inside.


S30: This is Mrs. William McKinley.


S15: Yeah. It’s chock full of photographs. The find is not made from old plates. These are fresh new photographs. This is the era of the door to door salesman. So chaps in like lumpy suits and those hats they were always adjusting are racing towards the front door pushing aside the the l the encyclopedia salesman and pushing aside the Fuller Brush salesman so they can get to your front Roosevelt and show you Teddy Roosevelt the vice presidential nominee Anna McKinley and Boy wasn’t that important decision when in gent January September 1981 McKinley Adlai Stevenson the elder was the vice presidential nominee of the Democrats.


S38: Wow. Who knew. I don’t even know there wasn’t Adlai Stevenson the elder. May I mark you down for a copy.


S48: What’s it going to take to put you in a new administration today.


S15: So people the salesmen would have been propelled by this pamphlet which I mean I’ve made a copy because this is it’s falling apart anyway. And they would be propelled by the words on these pages. Call attention to the fact that this is the most handsome and magnificent book the cover representing what the book stands for a thoroughly patriotic nonpartisan book a book which will be an ornament for the home table as well as most interesting useful and valuable book for immediate use. So from that breathless description. You can see basically what we have on cable news today. David pass me back the book please because it is written in the chatty EST for wit which I think we should return to frankly the chatty est kind of sort of everything’s great in America even though big things are happening. Here’s the opening line. This will be the last presidential campaign of the century and in many respects it bids fair to be one of the most interesting and most important the results of the Spanish war was to involve the United States in new and vast responsibilities whether rightly or wrongly that’s key whether rightly or wrongly we have the Philippines Cuba.


S48: But wait there’s more. We have the Philippines Cuba.


S34: Puerto Rico and Hawaii on our hands.


S49: What shall we do with those.


S48: Yes Mrs. Smith. What shall we do with them.


S34: So you see that rightly or wrongly that’s where the both sides comes from and throughout this thing throughout this it tells the seller to make sure that they they point out that this is a nonpartisan book.


S15: So. But how do you sell the merchandise. Well you sell the campaign. This campaign will be the most interesting and most important campaign. Either you and I have witnessed what you hear now right. Every campaign is the most important. I always think it’s true. Yeah. Great issues embodying I might say the life of the Republic come to the front and national leaders must stand the most careful scrutiny the their real worth must be known whether they be men of honesty ability and experience. And then in a twist that seems familiar today it is important to you and me whether the trusts shall boss everything.


S10: So that’s Elizabeth Warren.


S15: So you you go through the book it goes on for pages about how I’m supposed to instruct the salesperson the person who’s buying it and then we will close on the hard sell at the end. If after showing you everything that’s in this book and all the pictures here’s the script for how it’s supposed to end. Now Mr. Blank everybody wants this new and fresh campaign book which as you see will be a book of lasting value for it contains the history of the past and present which one needs frequently for reference. And here is a place for your name. Now Mr. and then it has instructions handing him your pencil and pointing at the line on which you would like him to subscribe. Because remember I’m just coming to show him the teaser he’s going to write his name and then I’ll deliver the full book for you. Everyone who has seen this prospectus seems to be pleased with it. You will see from these names parentheses showing your list of subscribers. What kind of people are attracted by it. And I’m sure you will agree that you want your name down with the rest. Then it gives a little more instruction from peer pressure. Yes exactly. From this point forward we leave the agent to execute his own tact and judgment. Be careful never to allow your customer to say no.


S22: If it appears that he is about to do so turn quickly to some interesting picture. Or subject and begin to explain him or read some passage that will please him.


S10: Never lose yourself possession. This is the critical point and your tact and skill must all be brought to bear at this place. To book the order.


S15: So these days of course are gone. No one’s. No one sells their books in person before it’s completed using deceptive and marginally entertaining patter.


S34: That’s done now by Amazon that puts up an early link to the book. It’s called e-mail. It’s called the hardest job fourteen ninety nine.


S22: Point ninety nine. Act now ladies and gentlemen you know the kinds of people who will be buying this book and you will want to count yourselves among them.


S45: All right. So my my chatter My chatter is also like it’s like a John Dickerson chatter.


S20: Actually it’s going to go on as well. Not not quick.


S30: It will feature a presidential audiotape though so. So some of you who know me know that I have a real thing about pandas which is that I cannot stand them. I think they’re fraudulent and lazy and neutered and ill tempered and I grew up in Washington D.C. And if you grew up in Washington D.C. in the 70s you were constantly dragged to the zoo to see this pair of pandas that Mao gave to Nixon in 1972 when the U.S. Open diplomacy with China and these pandas would sit lumped partially. Drearily occasionally mauling a keeper or failing to breed and then when they did manage to breed they would then sit on the baby that they had had and suffocated. But they got away with it because Americans were duped by the kind of fancy paint job and the elegant fur. And since then pandas have become this tool of Chinese diplomacy and China rents pandas. The United States had extortionate rates. You get a panda breeding pair there. I think there are four or five of them now in the U.S. but China maintains ownership of all cubs that are born. So after when a cub hits 4 years old they expel trade the cub back to China. And and now pandas are getting caught up in the the Trump trade war because they there’s a 20 year lease on a pair of pandas in Washington which are the those are the marquee pandas the D.C. pandas. And there’s this fear that China is going to refuse to renew that lease when it comes up next year. And there’s a worry that they’re gonna be sent home. I’m not worried about a panda war. Yes there could be a panda bear. I’m not worried about this but the Washington Post is worried about the Washington Post historically assigns more reporters to the panda beat than it does to HHS. And I want to I just want to celebrate a really great piece of they did last month where they talked about the fact that these pandas could get sent back to China. And it turns out they uncovered an amazing piece of audiotape which is that Richard Nixon when the Pandas came to originally in 1972 was obsessed with the pandas and he had some of the same interests that I do in pandas. And so there was this wonderful conversation that he had with the Washington Star reporter that he would want to hype about the pandas arriving. But Nixon had some reservations. So we’re going to play the tape of Nixon talking to this Washington Star reporter as a matter of fact.


S50: Let me tell you an interesting thing about that. You must know you can you can only read your own you it. And when I but I was talking to Rob Portman who talked to his 3-D horse and the meeting is very interesting. These are the male female problem. The problem however with PANDAS is that they don’t know how to make it. The only way they learn how to watch other pandas mate. And so they’re keeping them there a little while longer. Younger ones this sort of line you know how it’s gotten around if they don’t learn it. Get over here. Nothing will happen. So I guess I should have your best reporter out there to see whether that is they will learn. So now that I’ve given you the story of pandas let me get back to your more serious and he was right.


S51: Those pandas didn’t learn anything. They failed entirely. That is our show for today. The gaffe is produced by the twin cities own Joslyn Frank.


S45: Our researcher our researcher is also a Midwesterner Chicago’s Bridgette Dunlap Faith Smith and gratefully pulled together this this show here in St. Paul.


S52: Things of the Fitzgerald Theater for hosting. Gabriel Roth as the editorial director of Slate podcast June Thomas is the managing producer you should follow us on Twitter at at Slate gabfest and tweet your chatter to us for Emily Bazelon and John Dickerson. I’m David Plotz.


S29: Thanks for having us here. St. Paul. We’ll talk to you next week.


S31: All right. Friends thank you for the cheers that you can keep that up in a second. We’re going to have questions so we can have a brief Q and A. So if you want to come there’s mikes of stage left stage right.


S53: Yeah hi Joe Biden’s age and capacity is kind of an open discussion especially since Julian Castro’s attack on him during the debates which seemed to fail miserably in the polls and in the media.


S54: So I wonder is there more political politically expedient or polite or civil way for other candidates to bring up that issue and maybe more importantly do they have a responsibility to even if it’s not politically expedient given the stakes of the situation.


S14: It’s a great question. They want the first real campaign I covered was Bob Dole in 1996 and this was a big question with Dole too and none of the candidates could figure out a way to do it. And also in his case as it is a little bit with Biden too it’s a stalking horse for other stuff which is we think he’s too moderate and all that. I don’t know that there’s a way to to to bring it up successfully. I mean I think basically the way the smart candidates have done it is push them into corners about things from the past which when he talks about them a he’s constrained by the politics of the time b he knows that. So you can see in his head him trying to figure out who he’s going to offend and why and what he has to say which is just hard and complicated. And then three he’ll tend to use expressions that I remember when Bob Dole referred to the Brooklyn Dodgers.


S17: You know it was there was in my candy.


S14: Yeah except the thing the thing is he was hipper than he knew because my son and daughter both have record players and play records all the time. So it’s a lot of people are playing records again. But yeah but I think that’s probably the best way for them to do it over here.


S55: So I’ve been thinking a lot about federalism lately as we all want to do particularly in light of the Trump administration’s challenge of California’s restrictions on emissions. And I’m wondering what all of you particularly Emily thinks about this kind of flip flopping of partisanship when it comes to federalism and states rights.


S18: I mean you put that so well and I’m so glad you brought up this issue it is pretty amazing to see particularly the lawyers and the Justice Department make these arguments which are so contrary to positions that Republicans in particular have taken in the past not just about states rights and the kind of longer term like disfavored history of that term but also just the idea that we live in a laboratory of democracy and states should be able to have a lot of policymaking authority because they are closer to the voters than the federal government. So it is amazing to see people abandon that position when it’s no longer the policy answer that they want the states to be giving.


S56: Hi there. The term socialism seems to be a profanity these days that’s used by the president and the right wing. Is there a way that the left can recover that word and really actually show its definition so that the people that would benefit most from those policies could actually fight for it.


S14: There’s a bunch of great quotes about this. There’s Truman’s famous whine about Republicans always calling things socialist that are just exactly exist to help the people there. I’m not sure there are. There is unanimity among people who would identify themselves as Democrats that having the word socialist be reclaimed is a is is a great thing. I mean there are a lot of men who don’t want the word liberal reclaimed. That’s why they call themselves progressives. So I’m not sure that I think the bigger challenge for the Democratic Party is even if Bernie Sanders has tried a lot to explain what democratic socialism is. I’m not sure that he thinks that’s his best time span. I think the most useful way in these kinds of things is usually do to forget about the label and just talk about the thing that that people would understand and they’re in their hearts about either how prosperity is shared or not shared or helping the least among us or whatever however you want to phrase it but that actually doesn’t that doesn’t use the label but that quickly turns to a set of values that people would would feel more emotionally than they would a specific label.


S57: Hi I’m Tain danger. Thank you so much for coming to the Twin Cities. We’re so happy to have you here. My question was. JOHN DICKERSON You’ve gotten to interview President Trump. And I wondered when I watched it. Was there anything you didn’t ask the president because you were worried he would answer it.


S10: That’s a very good question.


S14: No I’m trying to think of what would be in that category. There were definitely I just found when I was moving into my new office the list of questions which is about 17 pages long and I got through about two and a half pages because that we had some issues in that interview. No but that’s really I wondered what that what kind of quixotic question that would be. Let me mull on that and think about it. Interesting question.


S58: Yes. So John described Elizabeth Warren’s plans as the fire that melts the snowball in Joe Biden’s hands or something like that. So I tried to but Emily came in with the horticulture. I was following you. It was good. So the question is kind of you know I could think of a lot of plans for a lot of things. Do you think that is just the fact that she has a bunch of plans that gives her like credence or is this going to make the kind of debate more about policy and that sort of stuff.


S18: I think having a lot of plans got her campaign going. It got her a lot of love from people like us who are interested in delving into policy. I think in the end the campaign is going to have to be about more than that and she knows that. And they are trying to add in the more kind of storytelling charisma driven elements. You know she stayed for some endless number of hours taking selfies with people in New York last week and that in itself generates coverage. I think she four hours. I just. Yeah really long time.


S26: But I don’t think I can’t think of another candidate who has any definition at all. I mean buthe did a little bit but besides that I can’t none of them have a signature the way she did.


S7: Well no.


S18: I mean Sanders is Medicare for all policy is absolutely his. Let’s see. I mean I think you’re right that Biden isn’t sick doesn’t have a signature like that.


S59: Yeah. And this is gonna be our last question I’m afraid. I’m sorry to hear other folks. All right. Thank you for coming out to Minnesota and the Twin Cities. My question is about regionalism and politics. Minnesota is kind of interesting in that we’ve elected Paul while Hubert Humphrey Walter Mondale to office Illinois Omar but then also Michele Bachmann Tom Emmer Tim Pawlenty. Do you think there’s any case for still regionalism or is it just an urban rural divide and that you know if you’re in the Midwest what’s one where it’s one place or is it just between the urban and rural areas I felt terrified of.


S16: You all know more about this than we do. But it seems like Minnesota politics has a distinctive flavor that there is this history in it different from Wisconsin which has its own sort of place in the political spectrum but that.


S13: Where they are now they’re not fans of Wisconsin. I said different. Different from distinct from them in Minnesota nice. Minnesota is interested in taking a risk on politicians who you know seem have some compelling set of values or promises they’re making that are at some kind of orthogonal relationship to regular old American politics and that that’s actually been an important incubator for some of the folks you just mentioned.


S60: Minnesota. Thank you so much for having us. It was great to be here. We’ll come back soon.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your slate plus membership.


S2: Enjoy.


S3: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for November 27 twenty nineteen. The Good Order and Discipline Edition.


S4: I am David Plotz of Atlas Obscura. I’m in Washington, D.C.. Joining me from New Haven, from the campus of Yale University, where she is associated with it in some fashion, which I can ever remember. And The New York Times magazine also. But she’s not at The New York Times Magazine. Emily Bazelon. Hello, Emily.


S5: Hello. That was like more detail and introducing unnecessary uncertainty.


S6: Oh, yes, it was. It was also ungrammatical, too. And then John DICKERSON is off again this week. I don’t even know why. Maybe finishing his book. That’s okay. Gabfests stalwart. Jamelle Bouie, New York Times columnist. Jamelle Bouie joins us from Charlottesville. Probably. Hi, Jamal. Hello. And we are taping on Tuesday. So we’re we’re a little bit before Thanksgiving. So you’re getting slightly early gabfest this week on today’s show. What is going on in the Navy? We’ll talk about the Gallagher case and the naval secretary be made to walk the plank. I guess that’s the right metaphor. If it’s the Navy be made to walk the plank, then impeachment takes a breath, kind of after a wild couple of weeks. Where do we stand? What is about to happen? Is there more room to to build a stronger case against the president? And then Thanksgiving is here. Thanksgiving, of course, it’s a holiday manufactured in part by President Abraham Lincoln. What holidays can we manufacture? We are going to adjust the calendar. We’re going to fill out the roster. We’re going to find new holidays that we should be celebrating rather than the ones that we do celebrate to go along with our Thanksgiving. Plus, we will have cocktail chatter. It is very hard to figure out what’s been going on over the Navy and particularly over at SEAL HQ. But the gist of it seems to be the chief, Edward Gallagher, credibly accused of war crimes and convicted of one count of of criminal activity where he posed with a corpse of an enemy, will remain a seal and will certainly remain a hero on Fox News. And the secretary of the Navy, Richard Spencer, is out of a job. The Gallagher affair has introduced us to a new and disturbing twist in President Trump’s dance McJob with the U.S. government having corrupted the Justice Department, corrupted the intelligence agencies, gutted the EPA, libeled the State Department, he now is choosing to impose his will and disturbing ways on the military. So, Jamelle, you are a Navy brat. You’re your child of the Navy. Was this the president? You were used to the commander in chief. Having authority over your parents, I suppose, as as a Navy Navy service personnel. Was this the president just exercising his privileges due to him as commander in chief or is there something more sinister here?


S7: It’s a little tough to say, right, as far as the president’s privileges as commander in chief. It’s certainly the case that President Trump has the authority to say reverse a demotion. But also part of being commander in chief is recognizing good military discipline, military order, acknowledging and recognizing the chain of command and B, military process for dealing with soldiers who have broken laws, book of war and otherwise. And so even if it may be broadly within the president’s authority, it still is extremely troubling, right. That the president would take a case of a soldier credibly accused of war crimes, of killing civilians whose own fellow men testified against him, testified that they took steps, he tried to keep him from killing civilians and that this soldier, you know, is disciplined by his commanding officers on the basis of strong evidence. And then the president reverses that, not because he has any particular reason to think that those that everyone involved in this particular soldier’s case was wrong.


S8: But because he seems to just think war crimes are good and that’s, you know, it’s not illegal, but it’s like unethical and troubling and kind of runs contrary to the spirit of the whole thing.


S9: Emily, the president has now pardoned four people accused, credibly accused or convicted of war crimes, including war crimes at the highest order of murdering innocents. His defense or the president’s claim is they’re killing machines, let them kill or today. He seems to have said something about how he was protecting warriors. He’s protecting our warriors. What’s wrong with that theory of the case that these are, in fact, soldiers who are there to kill and if they go a little bit far in the performance of their duties, that’s that’s better than than the alternative.


S10: I mean, I don’t think we’re talking about going a little too far. These are either accusations or convictions about killings that took place off the battlefield. And to state the very obvious, the law of war internationally deeply prohibits those killings and that kind of violence because it’s so important to get people to set limits. Certainly when our soldiers are at risk and in a vulnerable position, but not actually in combat, we would expect other countries and other forces to treat them as prisoners of war or certainly as people who are protected from random, really random kinds of killings. It should be. I think it’s pretty terrifying, not only in terms of the message it sends about America’s values, although that is also terrifying, but also in terms of our own service members abroad. If you’re worried about the brutal conduct of other people, then you want to be setting a different kind of example and sticking really closely to the international rules. You know, the one of the reasons I say that is that people in the military are so deeply concerned about the message this is sending. It’s very much in line with how kind of Trump sees the world. America first, this like brutal, you know, Hobbesian vision. But I think for people who actually have to serve, this feels dangerous.


S9: Right. I mean, I think that where that falls down is that if you look historically, one of the great strengths of the United States, even though we fail to live up to it a lot of the time, even though we’re we’re terrible hypocrites, is are pretense that we are holding ourselves to a higher standard. And our effort to hold ourselves to a higher standard. And often we did a better job than those who are those of our opponents. And that gave us an enormous amount of soft power in the world that made us trusted and welcomed in places not everywhere and not at all times, but in disproportionately. We were trusted and welcomed and thought to be able to be, you know, a useful intermediary, a useful hold keeper of the peace. It made it much easier for us to win in the market and to win in peace. And if you think of you think of probably the most important victory of the past century for the United States, it was to keep a Europe that is it been at peace. And it’s essentially allied with the United States and become more or less the single market until recently. And and then to to oversee the collapse of an enemy in the Soviet Union that was at its doorstep. And that was one first. It was won on the battlefield, but it was won by the kind of morality of the United States and our willingness to hold ourselves to a slightly higher standard, some more of the time that other people were. And it’s going to be we will pay the price on this. If not today, then then one day. Jamal, I wanna go back to the point you hit on, which is that one of the things that’s so noxious about this case, in the case of Galagher and then a case of some of the other people that Trump has pardoned, is that it is fellow service people who are reporting and testifying against them. It is the military itself. It’s filled with people who know that holding themselves to a higher standard is critical for discipline, for legitimacy. And and what is that going to do to to how these these services operate, if that is no longer the case that the vast majority of soldiers and officers are probably going to behave as they always behave.


S8: But the problems have really been the vast majority. Right. It’s that it’s a good analogy. I mean, a good analogy by analogy that comes to mind for me are police officers and cops. That part of the problem with the lack of discipline for bad cops is not that every single cop is going to suddenly become like a killer cop, but that the minority of cops who may have an inclination suddenly have a permission structure for doing it. And I think what soldiers likewise the vast majority of soldiers and officers not suddenly going to become war criminals, but the small minority who have an inclination towards extreme violence, towards unaccountable violence, all of a sudden now have a commission structure. The president, the United States has essentially said that if you do these things, I will pardon you because I do not think they are actually crimes. And given that U.S. troops are still deployed around the world, given that they’re still in combat situations, it certainly does seem like if that minor if this minority of soldiers picks up on that message, there may just be more incidents like the one the ones committed by someone like Gallagher.


S5: And then the other thing is that for the people who did come forward and broke the code of silence, which is an important component of being in a unit like the SEALs, very no one has their back. Like it’s the opposite message, right, that you’re gonna get. Right. And like, that’s also means that we should expect to have less reporting. I mean, imagine how. Those soldiers feel like that’s that to me seems like a terrible position to be in.


S8: Right. Their colleague. They know that their colleague, they saw him shoots unarmed civilians. One report says that they intentionally mess with the scope and a sniper rifles, that if he attempted to shoot someone, he would not be able to aim properly. And so they know this guy is not well and they’ve all just testified against him in the expectation that he would be disciplined and removed from active duty. And I don’t know, I would feel really nervous about the fact that I just tried to basically like, you know, have the state take this man’s freedom away for good reasons. And he’s just been pardon. And it’s suddenly been empowered for his actions. It would make it would disturb me and make me worry a little bit.


S11: Emily, what do you make of the food for about why the secretary of the Navy, Spencer, was fired?


S9: Because I think his Spenser’s view is that he was essentially fired for attempting to maintain good order and discipline and maintain the integrity of the process or mostly maintaining maintain the integrity of the process around Galagher and Gallaghers punishment. And the White House’s claim or the secretary of defense’s claim is no. That he was cashiered because he was tried to make a secret deal with the White House. And that was the problem. Does it matter what the real reason is? I mean, is it is is. Does it matter?


S10: You know, I think it matters. I mean, it seems like those things could both be true. Right. That the secretary of the Navy was trying to stick up for the rules, but also realized he was in this very difficult position and so was trying to come to some sort of deal. I mean, that and the deal could be bad, because if you think the Galagher should have lost his trident and that’s a really important message to send, then you don’t want any kind of deal. And maybe even entertaining the notion was a bad idea, but the idea that the official who is like stuck in the middle would try to work something out doesn’t seem at all surprising. The notion that that’s why the White House and, you know, Trump’s defense secretary wanted to get rid of him. That doesn’t seem very plausible. Like he wasn’t doing what they wanted. He wasn’t simply rolling over. And. And it is also true that Trump’s the commander in chief. So he had the authority to make this call.


S11: One of the things that is so disturbing about this, these particular pardons, but in particular the case of Gallagher is that it’s that’s clearly kind of a corrupt inside game with combination of Fox plus connected lawyers get got Gallagher the the pardon that he wanted. Clearly, if you have a problem these days, you and it’s something that the president might be able to help with. You hire yourself a Trump crony or get yourself booked on Fox and Friends or some Fox show that, you know, the president wants once. And I mean, I don’t I don’t. This isn’t really a question, Jamal, but like what? What are we supposed to do about this? This is just it’s it’s this way in which there’s this this completely shadow parallel set of corrupt activities that can go on simply by by cozying up with Bernie Kerik and Mukasey. And then you’re OK.


S12: I have no idea. I mean, I think this is sort of low key. The problem of American politics right now, I’m not have not just that there’s like this shadow network of lawyers and then whoever who can help you get off, but also the sort of shadow information system that is a completely closed system. Right. That it’s entirely possible to wake up listening to Rush Limbaugh, you know, make your breakfast, watching Fox and Friends, listen to HANNITY. I mean, you can kind of go through your entire day completely ensconced in an entirely parallel information network where some of Gallagher is, in fact, a hero who’s being persecuted by politically correct, you know, liberals in the deep state. And it’s continuously reinforced by voices and people that you trust. And in the particular moment, it’s sort of one of the participants in this as someone taking in more information. It’s a president of the United States who then recapitulates it in public statements, thus strengthening the feedback loop. It’s varied. I’ve used the word a couple times now, but it’s very troubling to put it lightly. And I’m not really sure how one deals with it.


S13: Emily, do you know how to deal with it? I don’t know how to deal with it. And it’s I mean, you know, like this is the reality we live in.


S5: The country continues along. We’re all going to have Thanksgiving this week. And yet, like, it’s deeply disturbing and like this parallel reality that is not okay.


S11: Have you guys looked at the list of people Trump has pardoned? That was a kind of a sidebar for this. That list of people Trump has pardoned is so appalling, like Sheriff Joe Arpaio, Dinesh D’Souza, war criminals, Conrad Black, some corrupt Republican politician from California. It’s just it’s just it’s just a very embarrassing list. Not to say that, you know, some of these people, you know, the president should exercise his power. Pardon? It’s it’s a great power to have, but that he exercises it so politically and for such such extremely scummy people and not for not for the millions of people who probably deserve it is very demoralizing. Jamal, I’ll leave you the last word on this. Do you think this this story has any political legs? Is this a story which which. Because it has to do with the military. It causes any loss of prestige for Trump with people who support the military or know, because it actually seems like, oh, he’s he’s standing up for warrior culture and that will generally hailo him.


S7: And on one hand, I think there is a Daily Beast report that The Daily Beast had a report that Trump may be considering bringing Galagher on the campaign trail with him next year. So if that happens, I think there might be a good case he could make that this could hurt the president, because you would suddenly have at least the media and Democrats making the point that Gallagher isn’t accused war criminal and you’d have details about what he did in the public eye again, and that could move public opinion. On the other hand, A, there’s that closed information system, which means that the president supporters are not going to be buds buying this. There’s a fact that within the military, there’s a distinct public opinion split between enlisted service members and officers, analysts, service members are much more friendly towards Trump. That options are a kind of mirrors the college educated non-college tunicates split in the larger electorate. And so this is the kind of thing that which may even improve the president’s standing with enlisted service members. Well, further sort of deepening his hole with officers, basically the split between people who do who may sort of be really committed to a warrior culture and people who value the professionalism of the United States military. But it’s it’s sort of hard to untangle what what the political impact of this would be in an election year. It may end up not mattering at all. Write that opinions on Trump are just so polarized at this point that this will just be further fodder for people who don’t like him and will support their view.


S11: And for people who think he’s the bee’s knees, I’m just gonna make one final point, which is that, you know, get one of the things that Gallagher had in his favor is that he he’s like, what you imagine.


S8: Trump thinks the soldier looks absolutely like a square jawed, white white dude.


S11: And if Gallagher were a black guy or Latino, no, no chance any of that happened. None. It’s it.


S8: Maybe if he were black. Trump I think actually. Justice sort of. No. Yeah, I thought maybe.


S5: Right. Let’s let’s. Jamal’s theory of what’s your theory?


S12: My theory here is that Trump does like to show off black people who he helps.


S14: Yeah, it’s true.


S15: MRSA. So I could I could if it were like a Denzel Washington looking dude, you know, square jawed, you know, spitting image of military.


S16: But with the military might protect itself maybe if it were a woman. Absolutely not.


S17: Mm hmm. Well, it’s all right. It’s all counter-factual. I don’t. But we’ll see.


S9: Let’s look at what other watch. Who. What other war criminal if he’s gonna pardon in the coming year or so.


S11: Gabfests listeners remember, we have our live conundrum show coming up at the Fox Theater in Oakland on December 18th. That’s just three weeks away. Two and a half weeks away. Adam Savage of Mythbusters is going to join us to solve conundrum of all sorts, all sorts and kinds. And it’s gonna be really fun. That show is a joyful show. And it and Adam Savage is so funny and interesting and smart. So you should join us there. Go to Slate dot com slash live to get tickets. And if you want, send us the conundrum yourself. Tweet to us at Slike Gabfests with at Slate Gab Fest with hashtag conundrum or go to slate.com slash conundrum and fill out our form there. So slate dot com slash live. For tickets on December 18th.


S6: Emily, impeachment had a hot and heavy couple of weeks. Now it is stopping for Thanksgiving, sort of. It seems as though after the holiday, Adam Shifts Committee will file a report to the House Judiciary Committee and that will be the next step in the impeachment process. I’m I’m in easily confused person. So it is not surprising that I find myself flummoxed by all the various things that are happening. But there seem to be, as we take a break from the hearing, so many different threads happening, so many different kind of corrupt conspiracies, all of which were aimed at trying to implicate Joe Biden, trying to get to Taja Biden. But you had a lot of Giuliani this week. Giuliani pressuring two Ukrainian oligarchs under us who are themselves under threat from the US Department of Justice. And Giuliani seemingly trying to get them to do his sinister Biden bidding by offering them relief from DOJ prosecution. You had Devin Nunez colluding with Giuliani sidekicks. You had another FBI investigation or DOJ investigation of Giuliani about perhaps him channeling foreign money into a PAC. It’s just like a lot of stuff going on. It’s very confusing. Can you just maybe give the summarize what’s interesting or what’s important or all this chaff? What is what do we need to focus on?


S5: I mean, I think the chaff that’s important is what we can prove about what Giuliani and newness were doing involving the Ukraine and like how much they were directly involved or just ginning up false evidence against the Bidens in an effort to help Trump and in fact, the 2020 election. That all seems pretty important. You know, newness is like talking about suing CNN for libel based on its reporting.


S1: On the other hand, he won’t answer a question, a direct question about whether he met with the Ukrainian former prosecutor who’s at the center of the accusations. So, you know, be good to know whether Devin newness, art Trump defender or a member of the House committee that is doing this whole impeachment inquiry, whether he was himself directly caught up.


S17: I’m interested in that question, but that’s all you’re actually you’ve fallen into the trap, Emily. You’re very into. What did you want me to do? Well, no, I want I guess we come out of a step back. A step back.


S11: We’ve come out of these weeks of hearings. We heard from all these people. But, you know, we haven’t heard from other people. And then there’s is list of going on around Giuliani and Trump’s taxes. And while Don McGahn have to testify and it’s just there are it’s like you’re being poked in the head and also being tickled on the feet. And also, you know, and and also someone has stuck a red hot poker in your eye. Like all different things are happening at once. And how do we focus on what we really need to focus on? What is it? Jamal, what is it that we need to focus?


S1: I think you should call Jamal. Though I do have thoughts about the legal proceedings. But let’s give Jamal a crack. Since I failed.


S18: So my hot take is you don’t need to focus on anything. I think that the best bet going forward is to throw everything at the wall to investigate, to, you know, subpoena everyone who might have any information on the president’s scandals, to hear from everyone to kind of draw these proceedings out. I personally, I understand that House Democrats don’t want this to appear partisan, but the fact of the matter is it is partisan. And I don’t quite understand the strategy behind narrowly focusing on one thing and leaving the rest of it kind of to float away, to drive towards a speedy, speedy trial. I think the smarter play, knowing that if you guys have this on Twitter recently, that in just six weeks we’ve gotten definitive evidence that the president tried to tamper in elections to secure his re-election by having a foreign power or a foreign country sort of run a sham investigation of an opponent. Right. Look, six weeks, we have definitive proof. So knowing what we know about the Trump administration thus far, knowing that there’s almost certainly other shady stuff, just go for broke and keep the investigation going as long as possible. Nothing else. We kind of know from the past that Trump does worse in the public when he’s sort of in a maelstrom of scandal. And there’s the immediate instrumental advantage of keeping a trial out of Mitch McConnell’s hands for as long as possible, keeping this thing going, so that by the time it does go to the Senate, it might be summer twenty twenty, it might be fall 2020. There simply won’t be enough time for McConnell led Senate to turn this into an attempt to investigate Biden, which is what Republicans in the Senate already signaling they plan to do.


S5: Jamal, to play that like Nancy Pelosi card. At least I think not that I’ve spoken to her recently or.


S1: What about the what about the supposed political cost of the country, just getting tired of this feeling like it’s distracting. What are you doing about my health care? My other complaints about the federal government? Like that whole notion that this matters to people on what in Washington, it makes for great TV, but it doesn’t help voters in their everyday lives.


S8: So I think I’m going to go for the non pro-George version of what I think about that argument, which is that I think it’s extremely condescending of voters across the country in America. The American public can care about multiple things at once.


S15: The American public isn’t sort of motto maniacally focused on its pocketbook.


S16: It’s clear from the 2014 midterm elections that the thing driving the energy for the Democratic Party wasn’t some belief that Democrats are going to immediately solve all the problems that voters may face. But anti-Trump energy, a belief that there’s something deeply wrong in the country and this is the best avenue to do something about it. anti-Trump energy is if Democrats are positioned to win the election next year at all, that will be that is the proximate cause. It seems to me that the the smart political play is to actually continue to gin up anti-Trump energy, to lean into the fact that that is where the the winds for your sales are coming from. And this idea that, in fact, responding to the public’s desire to see the president be held accountable is somehow sort of not the business of elected representatives. I don’t know. It’s just insane to me. It’s an insane being to believe. I don’t know. I tend to think that Pelosi’s vaunted capacity for political strategy is way overstated. And I think that this is a clear case of her hand essentially being forced into impeachment. That impeachment being a clear political benefit for Democrats so far and that her and her team still basically being extreme worrywarts about what’s going to happen next.


S11: Jamal, just to belabor this point, what is your case that the longer this goes on and the more threads there are, that the American public is more has more anti-Trump energy as opposed to exhaustion? What’s the issue there? Is there the kiss? Is there polling evidence of that? I don’t have a position one way or another, but it seems like you’d want to know from a numerical perspective. Does this actually make sense?


S15: Right. So so far, there’s no particular evidence that the public’s gotten exhausted.


S19: If anything, I think what the polling shows in the polling is from pretty stable is that impeachment does better. The more that there seems to be sort of like a real serious revelations. And that’s sort of the heart of my cases that we know there’s probably going to be others. If this does appear just to be a fishing expedition, maybe it hurts. Although I think the example of Benghazi in the Republican investigation suggests perhaps otherwise. But let’s say it’s the case as a fishing expedition. Expedition does not help then shore. But if there are regular revelations, if the public is getting regular news about what’s happening in the administration, I think that that helps. And I think that that keeps support for a decent, at least at its current level, and may even increase it. And I. This is part of this is just sort of like not not a data base case or quantitative case, but just a sense about how public opinion and how the response to the president has been. We kind of know we’ve over the past three years that when Trump is faced with this, we see this the reverse. When things are quiet for Trump, he does well, his approval rating ticks up. The public kind of gets habituated to him because external conditions are basically fine. Right. For the economy is growing there. We’re fighting a bunch of wars, but the public isn’t really thinking about them. There’s no sense of sort of extreme dysfunction. It’s only when there’s a sense of extreme dysfunction that’s Trump really starts to suffer. And part of what creates this sense of extreme dysfunction is the fact that Trump cannot handle serious scrutiny, that when faced with scrutiny, he begins to sort of self-destruct. And so part of my case for just continuing this thing is that the more pressure the White House faces, the more revelations come out, the more likely it is that Trump basically begins to melt down. And it’s that melting down, which bolsters the Democratic case for switching horses midstream and returning to a sense of normalcy.


S13: That’s interesting. I mean, what’s interesting about that, Jamal, is it makes a different case about timing.


S1: I mean, the assumption has been looking at the legal proceedings that the Democrats can’t afford to wait for the courts. To referee their subpoena requests. And that’s been based on the past administrations experiences, both the George W. Bush and Obama administrations. Congress had these subpoenas that like went on forever in the courts and were unsatisfactorily resolved, even though Congress didn’t outright lose. So this week we got a ruling from the district court, federal district court judge in Washington, Kitana G. Brown Jackson. And what Judge Jackson said was that this initial very extreme position that the White House took, that McGann has absolute immunity from testifying is ridiculous. And like this, it’s pretty obvious as a matter of law. And Judge Jackson wrote what sounds like a super solid 120 page opinion, knocking it down. But of course, now this case has to be appealed and go up the chain. And then when it comes back, even if the ruling is affirmed, then there’ll be all these questions about whether McGahn has to answer specific questions or not, like that’s the real legal issue here. So that’s going to take a while then. Meanwhile, we have the Supreme Court staying an order by the lower courts that Trump’s tax returns should get turned over. There are two cases about this. One is about whether Congress has the right to these tax returns. The other is about the district attorney, Cy Vance, in Manhattan. Trump doesn’t have a particularly strong legal position in either of those cases. But if the Supreme Court weighs in, we could wind up with a major ruling. And it’s not clear what the conservative majority on the Supreme Court is going to have to say about executive power. There are some justices who are extremely pro executive power. We could be talking about setting some really bad precedents here. There’s nothing Congress can really do about that since the subpoena case has already been set in motion and the other one doesn’t involve Congress at all. But I. One thing, listening to you make that strong case for letting these proceedings play out is that maybe the delay in the legal proceedings actually just like runs on a parallel track. And the only witness for whom this like matters really is maybe John Bolton. I mean, he has been doing this weird dance where he sort of dangles the idea that he has information that he wants a judge’s order, that he’s allowed to testify. Well, just Judge Brown actually gave that order. She said that her order would apply even if there were national security concerns. So if he just wants a fig leaf of a judicial order or just like that, back up to obey Congress’s subpoena. Well, like he could testify any day now.


S11: I wonder if there’s going to Jamal’s impeachment now, impeachment forever, impeachment everywhere. I wonder if there’s actually an interesting thing for Democrats to try to do, which is that it’s now clear that these public servants that the these mid-level officials who are mostly career professional officials can testify and that they’ve done it and they’ve done it bravely and very convincingly in a way that has been very impressive.


S20: And I wonder if there are other scandalous things that have happened in the Trump administration, even things that we’ve forgotten, but which are hugely corrupt involving Saudi Arabia or, you know, who knows what else, China, that there are bureaucrats and mid-level appointees waiting to testify. And just you just have to identify them and get hearings that are based on that rather than trying to, because they’re never going to get the Trump officials themselves. You’re never going to get Don McGann to say anything interesting. For the most part. But there may be other people hidden in the bowels of the deep state ready to have their revenge and do the deep state coup that everyone’s talking about.


S21: I think I think I would describe it as a deep state, too. But I think that’s right. Right. Like, if you look at one area that I would love to see Democrats really investigate and throw the resources behind.


S22: It’s just what is the nature of the president’s relationship with the leadership in Saudi Arabia and the leadership in Turkey that clearly something strange is happening there. And that I think the public would gain a lot from a deep investigation of it. And if there are things happening, as if there’s serious corruption there. And I think there’s you know, judging from I will eat mighty shoe if there’s not serious corruption in those countries where I was trying to find a way to like be, you know, measured about this. Yeah, absolutely. Look, it’s obvious that there’s something extremely corrupt happening in both cases. And if the Ukraine thing is any indication, yeah, there are probably mid-level bureaucrats, ordinary civil servants who know something now. Now, maybe you have an opportunity to talk if Democrats investigate. Earlier in the conversation we were talking about Gallagher. I said that’s sort of part of the problem with pardoning war criminals or restoring them to rank. Is that it creates a commission structure for bad behavior. Democrats can create a permission structure for good behavior, for whistleblowing, for helping, for encouraging these bureaucrats and people. We’re dedicated just to the work of furthering the interests of the United States government to speak in public and to say what they’ve seen and to say what they think. If they think something is going wrong and I think they would be valuable in its own right. And again, as we as we’ve seen with the president’s response to similar testimony over the past two weeks, neither the president nor his allies are going to be able to say anything. They have no real defense. The only defense they have is the hope that this fades from public view. Tell it’s just not let that happen.


S11: Slate plus members get bonus segments on this, the gabfest and on other Slate podcasts. And if you go to Slate dot com fleshed out, that’s plus you can become a member today. And today we’re gonna talk about what is the idea, the concept. The theory that we learned in school, in college that it influenced us the most and still influences us. What is it that we actually learned that you still take with you every day to work? Emily Bazelon and Jamelle Bouie go to Slate.com. Flash Gap has plus to become a member today and listen to that bonus segment. Abraham Lincoln effectively created Thanksgiving as a national holiday. It had a kind of previous existence. He he calcified it on the calendar as the fourth Thursday. In November, it was at. I didn’t realize the history, at least it actually is some getthis burgi kind of celebration quality to it. He announced it in October of 1863. It seems to have been associated with with some sort of celebration of Gettysburg. And so that was what put Thanksgiving on the calendar. FDR moved it around a little bit, but it’s remained. It’s bits. So it’s a manufactured holiday. It’s a holiday that has been given a great history. And and now is, as we’ve discussed, Emily and I have certainly discussed many, many times and certainly my favorite holiday and it’s the only it’s the best American holiday, in my view. And because it’s Thanksgiving week and we don’t have a lot of time and you guys don’t wanna hear some more heavy duty political discussion on a week like this, you’re cooking your mashed potatoes. We thought we would do a third segment that was a little bit more speculative, speculative about how to remake the calendar, what new holidays America needs. What is it that we could add to the to the holiday calendar and maybe what should we subtract from the holiday calendar that would make that would make us all excited. That would make people find a new celebration. That would bring them joy. So we can do this roundtable or we can just sort of start talking. I have a couple of ideas. But Emily, a ladies choice. Go ahead. What do you want to add or subtract?


S5: OK, well, so my first thought about this and I am now channeling my son, Simon, is that we should have a federal holiday once a month so that there is a three day weekend once a month. And we already have some of the months covered, but not all of them. Now, I don’t mean in suggesting this that there should be less school. I think we should add days to the school calendar if that’s necessary, though I don’t have a strong position on how many total days there should be. I do think the length of the summer in places that have like the long two and a half, three months summer is that’s been shown to just be like bad for kids learning overall, especially low income kids who don’t have lots of great summer opportunities. I do think, though, that the three day weekend, once a month would just be great as a break and that we should try to really like do a better job of protecting it as a real break. Can I. So that’s my.


S11: Okay. That’s it for. Okay. Can I argue with you. But not not that it’s not a good idea. It’s a good idea. I think what I find interesting about the holidays that matter is that they actually come. They they have logic behind them have history, they have tradition, they have feeling behind them and so. So yes. So yeah, we’ll have a three day weekend. But to me, it would make it valuable. If you say this is this three day weekend is to say it’s Labor Day or it is. It is. I mean one holiday I would it’s National Park Day. It’s National Park Weekend. So this is the this is the the three day weekend. This is the holiday which honors National Park. So a lot of people be like go to national parks, just re-admission, admission, national parks or whatever.


S17: Given love that give it some give it some structure, some identity, some symbolism symbol. I totally agree. I agree. I don’t think we do not just like three day weekend, like, oh, yeah, Friday is off or Monday is off.


S5: Its well, like the Washington Lincoln birthday weekend is the vaguest maybe an account or a Veterans Day which hasn’t really like. I don’t know. Yes, I agree. I think that’s true. I mean, one obvious day to add is voting day national celebrate voting actually vote on that day. Make it so much easier for people to vote. And we’re really honoring that as a civic holiday. Elections are now. Jamal, thoughts?


S19: I’m 100 percent for a holiday. I think people should work less. I think there should be four day workweeks. And I’m you know, what’s the use in living in a rich country? People can take time off. I have like a whole list of holidays I’d like to see. And I agree with David that it does help if they’re historically resonant, that they are that they have some greater symbolic value. And so I for years thought that. Right. The Juneteenth should be a national holiday.


S23: Everyone gets a day off and you can kind of make it sort of a national emancipation day for celebrating me into slavery. I think that would be really great. Yeah.


S21: I mean, there’s a Susan B Anthony Day in February. So why don’t like try to make some day in the year be basically a suffrage day, like in celebration of women’s suffrage, everyone gets a day off to celebrate the advance of democracy. And maybe that’s true to put that that a template like there were we we declared days off for events that represented like the broadening of American democracy now way they’re nice and inclusive and everyone can feel good about them.


S5: Who are you giving me an idea? Fourteenth Amendment Day? Oh, hell yeah. That’s like such an important reconstruction amendment right. I would be a way of both celebrating reconstruction and looking at the expansion of our rights to liberty, to due process, etc..


S17: You guys just not to be. Not to be. We’ve called Walter White. You’ve added you’ve had a Juneteenth, the 14th Amendment, Susan B, Anthony Day. That’s like that’s. It’s like there’s a little over field you get up to. We’ll get two of those, two of those, but not three, go form a committee and get two. I think mid-summer should be a holiday.


S20: So I think that day I think the June 21st, because it’s the longest day of the year, it’s like especially when you’re far north. It’s just so lovely to have that long day. And every it should be a day of picnic, a day of parties. People should kids should get to stay up all night that night. I think that that would be a great tradition. You have that in in Scandinavian countries and people are really moved by it. And I think we should we should adopt a piece of that.


S6: And I think there should be maybe there should be some sciency day, but I don’t know what it would be like. A moon landing. Not sure. I definitely think National Parks Day, there should be a National Parks Day or parks.


S24: I think that’s that’s. I think it’s a really good idea to.


S17: Yeah. Include the city parks. State parks are awesome. Definitely election day.


S5: I kind of want there to be game day like, you know, that Jewish holiday log. But there where it’s like the end of the counting of the Ulmarra, which is just like some number of days passed. Anyway, the end of it is like games, right? That was always the fun day at Hebrew school. What do you got to go outside and play games? I like the idea of like capture the flag and hide and go seek for adults, for everybody. Escape rooms could have a really busy agenda down that day.


S8: All right. I’m all about more civically themed holidays, so there should be a ratification day to celebrate the ratification of the constitution, which is just as important as the actual writing.


S20: That’s good. All right. That seems good.


S5: That’s a good one. It could be combined now. It’s July 4th. Although the Constitution needs its own separate day from the Declaration of Independence.


S24: Oh, I think that the declaration gets its own day. What is it? It was this it was June 21st, 1788. Is that when a certain number of states had done it? That’s midsummer. Midsummer. It’s summer day.


S25: Perfect. Could have ratification in midsummer. This kind of not that a line. I would say that you didn’t like have this sort of chaos, a good summer.


S26: And also think seriously about the glory of ratification.


S24: Yeah. All right. Well, we’re just getting started. I mean, I would do things like make Labor Day more of like an explicit sort of like militant labor holiday.


S27: But, yes, labor history. Really? Would that be fun? Yeah. What would that what would people like? Why would they enjoy that? I don’t know. I would enjoy it. They learn stuff, but people don’t use holidays to learn things.


S11: They use holidays to gather or to have activity. It’s the holidays are not an occasion for for for knowledge. They’re an occasion for commonality and joy and and release.


S8: So I don’t think I think I don’t know. Doesn’t mean we can’t use them to instill good Republican values.


S28: Yeah. We always watch MLK as I have a dream speech on MLK Day. Do you really?


S6: Yeah, that’s nice. You’re good. What a good person you are. All right. Jeff faithlessness If you have if you have ideas for great new holidays, please send them to us at. Tweet them to us at âTS like DFW or or go to the Facebook page. Facebook.com fleshed out first and give us some ideas there. Let’s go to cocktail chatter. So when you are having your pumpkin spice, pumpkin spice martini, Emily, over Thanksgiving. What are you gonna be chattering about?


S5: I read such an interesting article about Joe Biden this week. We didn’t talk about the Democrats. I was happy to have a break from them.


S28: But this article in The Atlantic about Biden as a stutterer, the thesis being that he is still suffering in some way from a fear of stuttering and that this is partly explains his gaffes in talking. I don’t think it fixes all of them, but it does get to some of them. It really made me have a lot more sympathy for Joe Biden and just a kind of explanation of what’s going on. And the key thing about the piece is that it’s by a guy named John Hendrickson, who is himself a stutterer. And the insight he brought and the kind of paphos of how the Biden campaign first like ignored him, didn’t want to grant him an interview, and then seems to have realized that it was probably in Biden’s interests to have this angle explored more. It’s really good. It’s in the Atlantic in their January February issue and also posted online.


S8: Jamal, what are you going to chatter about this past Sunday’s episode of HBO? Watchmen, while HBO is Watchmen, is a it’s an adaptation destined for a strange what it is. It’s sort of a IDN universe sequel.


S19: Slash remakes of a 12ish You Can’t book series in the 80s by writer Alan Moore and artist Dave Gibbons called Watchmen and Watchmen, sort of an important comic book series because it’s like the seminal kind of deconstruction of comic books series that Alan Moore and Gibbons use sort of these classic characters and archetypes to deconstruct the superhero genre, to think deeply about what these characters represent, to think deeply about the kind of world that would produce them, and kind of comment on America and the UK in the 1980s and sort of in this in a moment of turmoil and tension and inequality and so on, so forth. Really groundbreaking work, really important in the HBO series is jumping off of that in the first five episodes have kind of touched on some of those elements of the series, but have really been they’ve been think concern of building an independent story. But this past sixth episode, it called this extraordinary being is a direct commentary and a lot of ways onto the original comic series. And Recontextualize is a key part of that series in a way that I think completely makes you rethink what the show is doing and what the comic book was doing. And is it really just like fascinating piece of narrative storytelling in addition to being a very well directed and well performed piece of television? So I don’t want to go into any more detail because I don’t want to spoil things for people. But it was a remarkable episode of television. It sort of is commenting on the current series. HBO as watchman’s interest in America’s history of racial injustice.


S16: And I didn’t I was just blown away the first time I saw it. And I’ve watched that episode three times now and each time find something new to glean, permitted to really a remarkable piece of television.


S5: Can I skip ahead to this Episode 6, which now I’m interested in, even if I’ve only seen the first couple of episodes? Or is that a terrible idea?


S29: It’s really worth like what you really worth watching. The first up. So there’s not so much that each episode is Episode 6 is narratively dependent on most previous episodes. But I think sort of fully being immersed in the world will help a lot. Like you don’t need to read the comics, the original comics I think for this. But it does. I think it helps to have progressed through the series where I have a second service question.


S24: Hi.


S11: I just started reading the book. Yes, do I? Which I like. I like pretty much like it. I’m not I’m not a real comics person, but I’m liking it. OK. Should I finish it before I watch the show?


S29: If you’re already reading it, why not? Okay. Yeah, babe. I mean, the tricky thing is, is that the world of the comic book.


S15: Like if you’ve read it, there’ll be things you notice and like things you pick up on that are fun, but it’s not really narratively critical. And even the sixth episode, which is a commenting directly on the comic book, is not necessarily narratively critical. Treat it because the show does a good job of situating your situating. The key points you can just watch so you get there. I think I think that the value of reading the comic book. If anything, it’s just sort of like get yourself in the mindset of like what the Watchmen style is, which is sort of not just this, like the story of superheroes, sort of like very astute, like meta commentary on lots of different things and a visual style that is sort of they’re very dense with detail. The other thing I liked about the comic quite a bit is that you could read a dozen times, just depending on how you look at the panels, how you focus on the panels. You’ll notice different elements, different things in that kind of fact that I think carries over to the series as well, I think.


S11: All right. My chatter. So it’s Thanksgiving. So I’d like to give thanks to my Thanksgiving chatter.


S30: And I’ve had a head of really tough and heartbreaking year this year. And one way to get through hard times is through country music. And so I wanted to give thanks and recommendations to the women of country music who have been the soundtrack of my bad year. So I want to say happy Thanksgiving to Ashley Monroe and Marin Morris and Brandi Carlile and Emmylou Harris and Jody Masina and Kacey Musgraves and Lucinda Williams and Iris DEMENT and Loretta Lynn. I wish you many, many tears, ladies, in the coming year. So you’ll have great new songs for me. So thank you for being such a such a so supportive of me in the past year. And and may you have another miserable year.


S17: Listeners, you have given us a good list. I like that list. Yeah, well, there’s plenty plenty more on it. Plenty more on it. Merry Haven carpenter Ashley McBride. I like Ashley of all sorts. Dolly Parton, Patsy Cline. I was thinking Dolly Parton was missing. I’m glad you threw.


S11: Oh, yeah, yeah. Here you come again. That is a song that I really love. That is a great song. So, listeners, you again, as usual, did yourselves with your listener chatter.


S30: You’ve been tweeting them to us at Slate Gabfest. And again, like, let’s do it. Jolly one, a jolly chatter from Rachel Johnston p_h_d_ at At Reach M. Johnston. And she sends us a story about firefighters saving the day. And that’s the story from, I think, a Chicago newspaper about a boy who was having a birthday party. I think he’s a seven year old boy. And a lot of people said they were coming and nobody showed up at the birthday party. And these firefighters were down the street, just heard about it. Someone mentioned to them and they showed up at this birthday party and had a birthday party with this boy. And it’s just it’ll make you cry. I wept reading the story. Super cute story. So check it out. That is our gabfests for today. The show was produced by Josslyn Frank.


S3: Our researcher is Bridget Dunlap.


S4: Ryan MacAvoy helped out Emily Gail, Rosemary Belton. Help me out here in D.C.. Gabriel Roth is editorial director of Slate podcast, John Thomas, managing producer to follow us on Twitter at Slate Gabfest and send chatter to us there and send your conundrums to. There with the hashtag conundrum. And you should come to our conundrum show in Oakland, California, on December 18th at the Fox Theater. Go to slate.com, slash live there. Still tickets there for Emily Bazelon and Jamelle Bouie. What are you guys going to eat? Jamal, what is your distinctive Thanksgiving food that you’re going to eat on Thursday?


S31: We’re going to have collard greens and mac and cheese and stuffing. The thing I’m excited to make, it’s very simple, which is whole roasted carrots with garlic and dill.


S32: Yummy, yummy.


S31: And I have some other things on the menu. Can a bake a sweet potato pie is always going to make it salty.


S32: Honey pie, which my parents haven’t had before, but I make every year so good. Wait, did you say salty, honey?


S31: Yes, it’s a it’s a honey custard that I just finished with flaky sea salt.


S11: Yes, I know a pie like that. That sounds delicious. That sounds really good. Emily.


S30: What? I’ll eat that. What what’s the thing that you’re going to eat that you’re looking forward to?


S33: I always make apple pie. That’s my whole some basic contribution. I know it’s not super exciting, but I’m not a big pie maker. So just my making pie. It all makes my husband in particular happy.


S32: You’re very good, Baker in general. My experience that I’m not like a pie.


S4: Usually like you, but for me, although I’m not going to make any pies. I got other duties, but it will be my mother’s Moka chocolate crunch pie. I strongly recommend there’s a recipe for it on Slate somewhere. It’s the greatest dish anyone has ever made. Yummy. It is unbelievably good.


S34: So I hope you all have a wonderful Thanksgiving. Thank you for listening. We’ll talk to you next week.


S11: Hello. Slate plus. So. Slate plus today. Why not? Why not talk about what we learned and what’s stuck with us, so I was thinking I have a daughter who’s in college and then son in high school, another son in sixth grade. But I was talking to both my daughter and my my middle son this week and just struck at them. Been learning certain concepts or learning ideas that I remember learning myself or have already forgotten. And then you think back like, well, well, what did I learn? What did I ever learn in school anyway? Obviously, you create all sorts of knowledge. But but I was interested in sort of what the what the theory that stuck with you hardest, the things that you either used or like have become a defining metaphor for how you see the world or just words. For some reason, we’re were super vivid for you. And I wondered what that was for you guys. And I have three myself.


S28: But I want you to start with this one.


S11: I can start with I’ll start with one of them. I think the one concept in biology or maybe evolutionary biology, I’m not sure what you call it, but it’s stuck with me is the idea of K strategies versus our strategies.


S20: You guys remember what that is? No. In reproduction. So a K strategy is a creature that has a few but very expensive offspring. So us where you give your your offspring a ton of care, you really are there. They just ate for a long time. You individuate them. You know, it’s an elephant. It’s a giraffe. It’s us. And our strategy is where you just have like a good zillion offspring. Don’t give them any care. Just toss them out. Your classic like fish, your fish strategy, your sea turtle strategy. Like, where are you going? To have a ton of them? Maybe a few. And we’re gonna survive. We’re not going to really give them any care. And it’s a very useful way of understanding biology, I suppose, and how certain creatures pursue different strategies. It’s also really useful when you start to think about different ways of approaching problems in life, like there’s certain kinds of problems which you want to approach by giving it a huge amount of care and attention and time. And there are other problems which are like, you know what, we’ll just try a million different things. Some homework, some of what we won’t invest too much energy into and see what happens. And I find that a very useful metaphor for a lot of the time. That’s fascinating. Emily, what’s something you’ve learned once?


S1: Sometimes I just feel overwhelmed by all the things I haven’t learned. But I’m going to answer in the affirmative. So utilitarian theory occupies me a lot. I don’t entirely subscribe to it, but I think about it as a template often for deciding how much I care about something. So Jeremy Bentham and Cesar Bakara talking about the idea that you only punish people to the point where you’re getting a clear benefit of deterrence from it to kind of oversimplify their theory and just the notion that the greater happiness often has a role to play in evaluating moral or political decision making. I like I said, I don’t absolutely subscribe to it, but it it has shaped a lot of my thinking.


S11: Jamal, is there anything you’ve learned over the years?


S23: So there are many things I’ve learned, but there’s one thing that’s always stuck with me. I took a lot of philosophy in college. It wasn’t directly my major, but I made sure included a lot of philosophy and the philosophical tradition that I am very attached to as a pragmatist tradition in American philosophy, which is sort of an empiricist sort of anti ideal philosophical tradition, which is really concerned with the actual practical use value of ideas and of theories.


S35: And to William James, brother of Henry James is sort of a kind of pragmatist philosopher.


S36: And I read a lot of James and there is a paragraph from an essay called Moral Philosopher and the Moral Life, where he deals with this question of the social nature of ethics, of ethical obligations.


S35: And I don’t necessarily completely agree with the claims James makes, but there is a paragraph that’s always really stuck with me about what makes an ethical world and how how sort of our ethical determinations depend fundamentally on each other. It’s interesting to read the paragraph, but not too long.


S36: Wherever such minds exists with judgments of good and ill and demands upon one another. There is an ethical world in its essential features where all other things gods and men in starry heavens blotted out from this universe. No, there left but one rock with two loving souls upon it. That rock would have historically moral constitution, as any possible world with the attorneys in the menses could harbor would be a tragic constitution, because the rock’s inhabitants would die. But while they live, there would be good, real good things and real bad things in the universe. There’d be obligations, claims and expectations. Obedience is refusals and disappointments, compunctions and longings for harmony become again an inner peace of conscience when it would be restored. There would in short be a moral life whose activities you would have no women with the intensity of interest in each other, with which the hero and heroine might be in doubt. You all right?


S11: That’s lovely. I’m going to mention a couple others. Actually, yours. Yours reminded me, Jamal, a little bit of there’s a I remember reading hobs and actually this is kind of an anti an anti lesson that I took reading hobs and Hobbes’s book, Leviathan. And it’s. And one of hobs as arguments is that the life of humans and the state of nature is so intolerable that, of course, we need an over arching authority over us. Because because in the life life in a state of nature, no arts, no letters, no society. And which is worst of all, a continual fear and danger of violent death and the life of man, solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short. And the thing that’s always struck me is that it has something just deeply, fundamentally wrong, which is that we have never lived solitary lives like that, that there’s this fundamental misconception that’s made by these philosophers, the early political philosophers, which is that the solution is a dictatorship because people are individual atoms out there and they’re just constantly banging up against each other.


S20: Individualistic Lee. But actually, we’ve always been social creatures and so we’ve always had society. There’s never been humans without society. And this notion that therefore we need to create artificially create society with an authoritarian ruler over it was always like misguided. So that was one that I rebelled against.


S8: I think you would like an essay by a philosopher named Charles MIL’s called Ideal Theory as ideology.


S27: OK, I’m hard.


S11: I don’t think I could get through that with my forty nine year old brain.


S5: But maybe someday I want to put in a word for reading works of epic poetry. My favorite thing I’ve ever done in school was to read the Aeneid, and that meant I had to take a lot of Latin first and it paid off in the Aeneid because the immersive quality of that story and of reading it in this puzzle form foreign dead language was such like enthralling experience for me, and I’m sure you could do that with other epic poems. But I feel like it both gets at the beauty of language and also the pull of the storytelling is so strong. And that has affected how I’ve read and thought about so many novels and television shows. And just like any serial narrative drama, which is my favorite form of taking in. I mean I was gonna say my favorite form of entertainment, but it’s really my also my favorite form of learning.


S6: All right. Slate plus. So go forth with that. And heaven enriched and returned Thanksgiving weekend and learn.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your slate plus membership. Enjoy this episode of The Gabfest contains explicit language.


S2: Hello and welcome to Slate Political Gabfest for December 12th, Plane 18, the CROSSFIRE Hurricane Edition.


S3: I’m David Plotz of Atlas Obscura. I’m in Washington, D.C., just down the street from Congress where the House Judiciary Committee is, even as we start to tape its debating amendments to the articles of impeachment. Joining me from New York City studios of CBS Radio is John DICKERSON of CBS 60 Minutes. Hello, John.


S4: Hello and welcome. I think I say welcome, but that’s OK. I know I’m I mean, it’s a general welcoming.


S5: John was being beneficent from the campus of Yale University. The hardest working person in my journalism will look bad. Lord of The New York Times Magazine. Hello, Emily.


S6: David is making up for an earlier description of me, which perhaps we’ll play at the very end on today’s gabfest.


S7: The House files and debates articles of impeachment against the president. What is going to happen? What will happen if he’s impeached? And is this a wise political move? Then the FBI inspector general finds no partisan motivation or witch hunt in the 2016 FBI investigation of President Trump. But plenty of FBI incompetence, misbehavior, corner cutting. We will discuss. And then The Washington Post gets hold of a huge trove of confidential documents about the Afghanistan war. Is this a new Pentagon Papers? Will this change the course of that endless war? Plus, we will, of course, have cocktail chatter this morning. The House Judiciary Committee is starting its debate over two articles of impeachment that House Democrats are leveling against President Trump, one regarding his abuse of power and attempting to blackmail the Ukrainian government into investigating Joe Biden, forcing them to launch or actually announced investigation. As a as a chit in order to get military aid that Congress authorized actually delivered to them. The other article regarding his constant obstruction of Congress’s attempt to investigate him over this attempt to blackmail the Ukrainian government. There will be significant debate today, Thursday over these articles and they are expected to then be voted on in a party line vote with the House Judiciary Committee passing these articles. And they will then go on to the full Congress or they’ll be voted on next week. And if again, if those articles pass, the president will have been impeached by the House and will then face a trial in the Senate. So, Emily, when he starts off by explaining maybe what the two articles, which will probably not be amended, Democrats are probably quash any amendments. So the two articles as written. What what are they basically saying?


S6: The first one is about Trump’s abuse of power, and the second one is about his obstruction of Congress. So abuse of power relating to the Ukraine affair.


S8: The idea here is that Trump corruptly solicited foreign interference in the 2020 election with all the Ukraine shenanigans involving the pressure campaign, trying to get President seleski to open an investigation, or at least an announced investigation into the Bidens, and also pursuing Trump’s unfounded theory that it was Ukraine, not Russia, that meddled in the 2016 elections. So that’s the substance of that one.


S6: Obstruction of Congress is about all the ways in which the administration has refused to cooperate and comply with congressional subpoenas. And so the point here is that rather than contest particular lines of questioning or particular requests for evidence, the administration has just issued these blanket refusals to cooperate in any way with the impeachment inquiry. And Congress is correctly saying that this is unprecedented. And the sort of underlying debate about these articles of impeachment is whether it was smart or mistaken to only do two. There were up to the last minute debates within Congress about whether to also include an article of impeachment about Trump’s emoluments violations, the idea that he’s been raking in money from foreign governments at the Trump Hotel and other places. And then this question of whether there was anything to salvage from the Mueller investigation. There was a, I thought, sharp piece in I mean, sharp in a good way, a piece in lawfare by Susan Hennessey, arguing that if nothing else, Congress should have included an article about Trump’s effort to get former White House Counsel Don McGahn to falsify the record about McGann.


S8: Trump’s request to McGahn to fire Mueller. Mueller Yeah. So Trump’s apparently said to McGann, Can you go fire Mueller? And McGahn said, No, I’m going to resign before I do that. And then later, apparently Trump or maybe I should use the word allegedly. Trump went back to McGahn and said, can you falsify the records so that we can cover up that I ever asked you to do that. So Susan, as he was arguing, like, if nothing else, that is a clear crime to follow order or falsification of evidence. And the Democrats should have included that, but they didn’t. They want the narrative to be clean and focused on Ukraine. And so that’s where we are.


S9: I just want interject briefly about Don McGann. You know, there was this debate about whether staffers should ignore the president or not, Don, again, by ignoring the president probably helped him keep his job. Carry on.


S10: Yes, of course. Look at the staffers.


S11: Ignore the president when he gives them orders. They don’t ignore him. When he tells them not to testify and tell them I’ll testify. They obey slavishly and they don’t show up to testify. But that’s another point. So there’s a school of thought. John and Jamelle Bouie of The New York Times has articulated this repeatedly, including on the gabfests over Thanksgiving, that Democrats should draw this investigation, this impeachment out, and that they should have kept the investigation open and vast and wide, given the scale of the president’s misdeeds and corruption, because it really is.


S5: I mean, there are two things that are articulate here, or certainly if if proven and if if the case is made, they are certainly impeachable. And, you know, by my lights, something that makes him unfit to be president. But there’s a ton of other stuff. Emily mentioned a couple of them. There’s the constant line. There’s the obstruction of justice. And in the Mueller. So so what’s the reason to. What’s the reason to keep this concise, tight, fast?


S12: So the reason is you’ve got to how you want to keep control of the House. You’ve got a number of members of the House who are in districts where there is either’s skepticism about impeachment or there is there are voters who care about my. About how much of the public conversation is taken up by impeachment. They’d rather be hearing. And those Democrats running those districts would rather be talking about something else. And to the extent that impeachment is the constant headline, they will every day have to figure out how to get around impeachment to show voters they care about things that affect them in their lives. I guess in the underlying theory, I think it relies on the idea that that having an impeachment process kicks up either a new information that will get through the already views people already have about Donald Trump and that impeachment has some special is some special venue for that. That seems to me a hard case to make. It seems to me that that people are basically they have their their views about Donald Trump. And if you’re a Democrat, you want to excite their most negative views as close to the moment they make their voting decision as possible. I don’t know that impeachment is the venue through which you do that. I think that President Trump excites those people’s negative feelings about him through his own behavior. I think that an impeachment process and testimony and members of Congress talking about his behavior is less effective. And I think there’s been no evidence. Certainly there was no certainly in 2018. This is the case. There’s no evidence that Donald Trump is going to stop providing people who are unhappy with him or are susceptible to being unhappy with him. He’s going to keep providing that information, whether impeachment happens or not. And he might do it in a more powerful or colorful form.


S5: Two is the argument there. Then the argument is we do it because it was our civic constitutional duty to do it. We do it briskly because like because it’s just it’s it gets too complicated, too it becomes too encompassing if we don’t get Bursley and we can count on the president insofar as our goal is to win this election and to have anti-Trump sentiment motivate voters, Trump will do a fine job of doing that on his own.


S13: I think you’ve articulated perfectly and just want to put a fine point on what we talked about last week, which is it is absolutely the house’s duty to put all of this down in writing as as they see it and have people take up or down votes on specific behavior, go all the way back to the constitution, show the way in which this is. What’s at issue here is, is that the central question of the presidency as it was conceived? Will the president act in his own interest or in the country’s interest? That is the big casino in all presidential behavior. So now whether it’s been proved or not is a separate question, but whether it’s a legitimate area of inquiry. There is no more legitimate area of inquiry. If you look at the way they thought about the presidency. So you want to get all that down and writing for sure. And then the political question for impeachment, it seems to me, as do you as a as a partisan get the maximum benefit from tonnage or simplicity is simplicity of narrative. You know, president asked for a favor. Shouldn’t have done that. Or is it emoluments? Mueller knew about WikiLeaks, but lied about it. Told his lawyer to go fire Mueller, but didn’t you know all the rest? And I that’s it seems to me, where the political.


S8: Question The Democrats kind of flicked at the pattern of misbehavior and kind of like introductory paragraph, right? So they didn’t leave it out entirely. But, you know, the argument against Narrow isn’t I don’t think it’s a well, I guess Jamal’s making a political argument. There’s also just a like right side of history argument that you don’t want to appear to have condoned or let slide all this other behavior.


S11: Emily, can you imagine a current Washington, not a phantom fan, a fantasy Washington? Joe Biden and John McCain and Tip O’Neill all knocking back drinks. A real Washington where any impeachment could be carried out fairly and with integrity. Because I cannot.


S14: Well, I think the result of the Democrats are being unfair to President Trump. You mean that you can imagine the Republicans looking at this in an objective fashion?


S5: I cannot imagine. I cannot. The Republican Party appears to have gone too far, gone so far off the edge that they did nothing. I mean, the president’s behavior by any previously articulated standard that any member of Congress has has subscribed to is so far outside the bounds is so far. So it rages that you just can’t even imagine that for them not to take seriously impeachment now means that they they simply could not take any impeachment seriously. I mean that literally. If this is not if what’s happening with President Trump is not does not rise to some level of impeachment worthy consideration of impeachment, then for Republicans, nothing will ever do it. And I think the Democrats may find themselves in the same position, which is that because of how Republicans have responded over Trump, that presently the next Democratic president, if there’s a Republican House, there’s gonna be some version of this is gonna happen as well. We’ve reached this stage of partisan warfare. And I don’t think Democrats I don’t think Democrats are in a mood to act with integrity either. I think that this is a process has now collapsed fully into partisanship. And the conclusion from that is, is that we have an imperial presidency, because if a president cannot be removed from office by impeachment, and I think that there’s an argument now that it’s impossible because we’re never going to have big enough majorities in the Senate if a president cannot be removed from power by impeachment and a president can, with impunity, refuse court orders, refuse congressional demands, then the president is therefore able to do essentially whatever the president wants to do. So if impeachment doesn’t work, then the whole system becomes an executive dictatorship. That’s my distinct worry. And I and I just don’t see where the ability of Congress to act with integrity is going to come come from because it appears to have vanished. Maybe I’m being too pessimistic.


S8: Well, I see why you’re concerned about that. I mean, I don’t think that were quite there yet. Looking forward, though, I mostly agree with you about the present. I mean, you know, John said earlier, like, it’s not clear whether these facts against Trump have been proved. I don’t know. I feel like it’s pretty clear if you connect the dots of the testimony, there’s strong proof that I haven’t had the venue in which to do that.


S9: They haven’t had a trial yet.


S8: Right. That’s true. Yeah, that’s true. It just looks from the testimony like a pretty damning case to me, just like looking at this question. Then you have, I think, a separate issue about whether this rises to the level of conduct that demands impeachment. Then we’re in a universe that’s more parallel to the Bill Clinton impeachment, in which it was also clear that Clinton had lied under oath. And then the issue was whether in the context of, you know, the Monica Lewinsky affair, this more private behavior of the presidents that seemed to rise to the level of conduct necessary to impeach the president. Congress said no, but you could have imagined a different answer to that. And when you look at that parallel, that seems to me like some evidence. You know, Democrats really, really resisted drawing that conclusion. I think you can make a principled defense. You can also argue that like lying under oath was a big deal at the time and that maybe that was a mistake. If you’re thinking about this problem of impeachment being a real remedy and the threat of the imperial presidency. The reason I don’t think we’re there yet is that, well, first of all, we don’t have an answer from the Supreme Court about presidential resistance of this kind to the power of Congress to investigate. Now, I mean, I think one of the reasons Democrats aren’t pushing that is that they don’t want this conservative Supreme Court to answer the question. And another is just this problem of delay that has come to plague these court proceedings. It’s still possible, though, that the Supreme Court would back up the decision it made in United States vs. Nixon. That was unanimous in 1974 that, you know, was so important in precipitating Nixon’s resignation. So, look, let’s not give up on the third branch since we haven’t even really heard from them yet this time around.


S15: I’ve given up on commuting, too. Do you think impeachment is impeachment and removal is possible anymore? Well, I think if you had. I mean, remember Nixon’s case, what sunk him was that you actually had actual recordings.


S16: Now, I think you would have based on the motivated reasoning we see in this instance. I think you would even have people saying insane things even if there was a recording of the president saying something. And in part, what leads me to believe that is you have people, Congressman Sensenbrenner, who is the ranking member on the Judiciary Committee, complaining about about how the president isn’t being given a fair a fair trial. Sensenbrenner knows because he was chairman of the committee when they impeached Bill Clinton. He knows that this is not a trial and he knows that that language has specific meaning. So for him to use that language is is more than just sloppiness. There’ve been a number of instances here when even when this whole thing was started, when Kevin McCarthy, the Republican leader, talked about Democrats making up the rules for impeachment. Well, that’s the way it goes. That’s what happens with impeachment. The majority gets to make up the rules. So when you claim that the the rules as they stand are somehow contravention of the rules, you’re you’re acting you’re not acting in good faith. So if if that’s the motivated reasoning that goes on, then you can imagine even if there was a recording, you would have people saying things that aren’t. So I would I guess what would puzzles me is, you know, Mario Loyola writes in The Atlantic a piece about how the Democrats have not proved impeachment. Polls do show that 70 percent of the country think the things the president did something wrong, which suggests that either the president has proved it through his behavior or Democrats approved it in the case they’re making. Now, the difference, the next question is, OK. He did something wrong, but is that impeachable? And what seems complicated here for a Republican is I think there are there are a number of Republicans who think he did something wrong. But election is coming. Let’s not use this severe sanction when it can be figured out by the voters. But but not all of them want to say that out loud, because the minute you say that out loud, then the follow up question is, Will, wait a minute. If you think it’s something wrong, what did he do wrong? And if the thing he did wrong was use his office for his own personal gain, then isn’t that like textbook impeachable, the abuse of power? And so then you’re you it seems to me you backed yourself into a bad place. And I’m still waiting to see. I mean, what we’ve seen now is an effective effort by the president’s defenders to basically just confuse the issue. Talk about process. Use the Democrats political pickle to kind of put them in a corner by kind of stringing this out. And all that. But I I wonder what some of those Republicans are going to do when they have to kind of say what their ultimate position is on what the president did. And I know we’ve still yet to kind of see that.


S17: The best defense of Trump that. OK. He tried to abuse his power for his personal gain, but didn’t work and he pulled back at the last minute. The problem with that defense is that the only reason he pulled back was he was being exposed. And again, government officials around him kind of saved him from his own actions. But I feel like that’s the if I was a Republican senator and I wanted to vote against removal, that’s where I would land.


S16: Yeah, I think you’re I think you’re you’re probably right. And I think you could say, look, and the people have a chance to make this decision and let’s not use impeachment lightly because of what, in fact, David said, which is that then we get you know, impeachment comes with every new presidency because we’ve downgraded the the sanction. I think you’re probably I think that’s probably right. Yeah.


S8: The problem with though. I mean, I agree they’ll say that. But the problem with that is that elections obviously are not just about Ukraine. Like they’re not just about these two articles of impeachment. They’re about kazillion other things. And so it’s just a very blunt instrument for addressing presidential abuse of power and misconduct.


S11: Emily, the reporting this week suggests the Senate is going have a pretty quick trial. There’s been there’s a sense that the president wants it to be histrionic and with lots of witnesses and long and drawn out, although I’m not really sure why it’s a pity. I guess he loves the chaos. And Mitch McConnell seems to be leaning towards doing something very, very fast, maybe with no witnesses at all. What do you think the what you think this trial is going to look like? And and how do you think that Democrats who are running for president, who are going to be jurors in this trial should conduct themselves?


S8: I think McConnell’s probably going to prevail. The big question in my mind is whether they try to call Jill or Hunter Biden and make it a political spectacle in that regard, which I think Trump’s base and Fox News. Would just absolutely love. And then in terms of the Democratic senators, I think they should be proper and sober and weighing the evidence and behaving like jurors, like their job. Not in a way that is politically grandstanding. I don’t even think they’re gonna have to grandstand to be able to be condemning toward the president unless some magical defense appears at the last minute that we don’t know about.


S11: Listeners remember, we have our annual conundrum show coming up next week live at the Fox Theater in Oakland, California. December 18th, Wednesday night, we are going to be conundrums in our little tushies off. It’s gonna be fantastic. We’ve so many great questions. We are so excited to see you live. There’s still some tickets left. Slate dot com slash live. For tickets again, December 18th at the Fox River in Oakland. And we have a fantastic special guest, Adam Savage of Mythbusters. It’s going to be busting conundrums left and right with us. Join us. Slate, dot com slash live to come. Here’s a quick aside to remind you that your holiday shopping doesn’t have to be too hard because Slate has an online gift shop. You can order a pair of our dazzling fuchsia slate socks, which I have I wore yesterday and indeed are dazzling. My eyes are blown out by them or an ultra comfy hoodie featuring the slate asterisk. And now through December 25th, Slate’s offering 15 percent off using code slate fifteen at shop dot slate.com.


S18: That shop dot slate. Dot com.


S7: Department of Justice Inspector General Michael Horowitz issued a 434 page report this week. That reached two conclusions. First, the FBI investigation into Russian interference in the election and the Trump campaign’s involvement without Russian interference.


S11: Known as Operation CROSSFIRE Hurricane, which is incidentally, the most. OK. Boomer named for an FBI operation, you can possibly imagine. OK. Boomers was invented to be hurled at Operation CROSSFIRE again, but that that investigation was properly predicated. That is it was not based on some kind of partisan witch hunt by the Obama administration, but it was based on the evidence that the FBI saw and was a reasonable premise for the investigation to take place. And second, Horowitz concluded that the FBI was alarmingly loosey goosey about certain aspects of the investigation, notably notably in the way that it broke rules in order to win approval of a FISA warrant on Trump advisor Carter page and then to re renew that warrant a couple of times. So, Emily. Attorney General Bill Barr and John Durham, who’s a prosecutor who is doing another investigation at bars behest. Basically the same investigation of bars passed immediately denounced the conclusion of Horowitz’s report, Horowitz’s investigation. Durham’s report will presumably reach the conclusion that the FBI was politically motivated. So what do we as citizens do with these competing narratives where you eat, get to live in your own factual world, in one world? This was a properly predicated investigation and the other. It was a politically motivated investigation. And just you watch Fox News, all watch MSNBC. You live in your world. I live in mine.


S8: Yeah. So I will. I wish I had like the biggest magic marker in the world to draw a really thick line between the two lessons of the Horowitz report in the world of Donald Trump as the president. And we’re talking about politics. What matters is that, yes, there was a sound predicate, a sound basis for opening this investigation. There was political opinion expressed by FBI agents on both sides. We have heard a ton about the FBI agents who are worried about trumping elected. Now we have evidence that FBI agents were also totally thrilled that Trump was being elected. What Horowitz found was that these opinions did not mean that the FBI was doing something politically biased. The agents cared about who won the election. They were also doing their job separately from that. That makes total sense to me. I think it would be better optics wise if FBI agents stop texting about their political opinions about who should be the president. But I completely imagine that they could set aside that desire and do their jobs properly, because that’s what they’re trained to do. And so in my mind, the response that Attorney General Barr and John Durham, the prosecutors in charge of this criminal inquiry that Barr is launching into these very same questions. I think it’s reprehensible and really problematic for the Justice Department to be using its microphone in this really politicized, weaponized way. And I really wonder what is going to happen when John Durham comes back with presumably some damning report about the FBI, perhaps even criminal charges against officials who the inspector general has effectively cleared. And I especially wonder about this in the context of Christopher Wray, the FBI director. He gave a factually sound, reality based reaction to the inspector general’s report, said he accepted it, said there were lots of problems to address at the FBI with. There are procedures for getting FISA applications, which I want to talk about. That’s the other side of my black magic marker line. But he was like giving a reality base, like norming normal government official response.


S17: And Trump’s response to Ray, of course, was to denounce him. So if Durham and Barr want to criminally charge FBI officials or other people at the Justice Department and Christopher Wray is still FBI director. Then what? I mean, where are we going to be when we have that kind of eventuality or our bar under or I’m just going to spin this investigation out endlessly past the election so that Trump can keep pointing at it as his vindication, as he has done with so many other trotted out moments that he’s claimed.


S8: We’re gonna have some big revelation that damns all his enemies and exonerates him.


S16: And then it just never comes the way to people should not be confused about this. As far as competing views is not to frame it as that way. I mean, here you have had somebody who produced a 400 page report who did all of the work and provided the evidence to come to a set of conclusions. And Barr didn’t give any evidence for his the position he held. And it seems to me that he knows somebody who’s not the president’s lawyer, but is the attorney general. He owes some professional restraint to the I.G. He may privately disagree with the findings, and Durham might, too. But unless they’re going to come with evidence to do it in the way they did seems just super irregular. And also as a part of a larger effort to kind of throw all truth up in the air. But I would like to hear what you guys think, because for years you were skeptical of the FISA courts, of the standards of evidence, of the fact that basically, as they say about indictments, you know, you can indict a ham sandwich, that there really were no checks on anybody seeking a FISA warrant. And we had the numbers to suggest that was the case. But now we have detail after detail after detail. How I thought, particularly in the Carter page, context page who played didn’t play very big role in the mother in the Mueller report, but who played a big role in the public debate about how this was all being carried out. The FBI sure did. A bunch of exculpatory evidence pumped up evidence that was to make it look bad. Left out the fact that he was that that page who was meeting with Russian officials was then advising the CIA on what took place in those meetings. That seems to be a real abuse regardless of how this whole thing started.


S14: Yeah. I mean, this is the other side of my line.


S17: If you’re thinking about FISA applications from the point of view of civil liberties, like the long running ACLU critique of the FISA court, it’s that it’s secret. It allows for all the surveillance. You don’t you once you’re in like you could be a terrorist suspect land or like a threat to national security. You don’t know you’re being surveilled and even worse. You never get the application afterward. It’s all secret. And I think what we’re seeing here is the danger of shrouding law enforcement tactics in utter secrecy, because the FISA court, like you said, has approved basically rubber stamped almost every single application. And what we’re seeing here when you actually look under the rock is that the FBI is somewhere between sloppy and incompetent or just indifferent to actually doing this in any kind of fair way. I mean, the particular fact about the Carter page FISA application that just floored me was that he had been giving information to the CIA for years and they just left that out. I mean, this is the part that a government lawyer actually falsified in an email and could be criminally charged for. But just think about that. This guy who our government is surveilling without his knowledge or really hardly any check on that power. Turns out was like an intelligence asset for another agency. And the FBI just hid that information from the FISA court. That’s that’s really bad. We should care about fixing those problems and we should really do something about the level of secrecy in these FISA proceedings.


S19: So not. Well, I mean, it’s that page point. I mean, just to to to spin it back to what John said. It’s that the. The fact that he was doing the CIA’s work was what allowed the FBI to gin up suspicion about him that justified the warrant. It wasn’t just that they ignored it. It was the actual work was a. Was was the predicate for the the warrant itself, which is outrageous. But I guess I’ve always assumed I mean, that the FBI has been playing fast and loose with FISA stuff for years because any legal proceeding, which there’s only one side like I mean, even legal proceedings where there are two sides, the prosecutors are constantly engaged in chicanery. But in one side where it’s secret and there’s there’s kind of no there’s no opponent if you knew that they were doing stuff that was shady. The question I had about that, Emily, is that one and maybe I misunderstand the FISA process. But one thing that I think would go a long way towards fixing it is you. It’s very clear why the target cannot have an attorney in the FISA process because the target doesn’t know their target. Like, how can somebody represent you know, if you’re Carter Page, you don’t know you’re about to be secretly surveilled. So you can’t hire an attorney to tell them not to secretly surveil you. That would go against it. But why doesn’t why didn’t the court have something, basically a devil’s advocate, someone whose job it is to represent the interests of the surveilled person and to be the antagonist in that process? Because now we’re relying on the judges to be the antagonists, the judges to weigh in, question the evidence. Why isn’t there a counselor whose job it is to essentially say, my, my client cannot be here because my client does not know they’re being surveilled? And I understand that. And I’m never going to tell anything about that. I’m properly vetted. I’ve passed all security clearances. But I’m going to look at this evidence you’re presenting here. And I get evidentiary rights and I can question it and I can and poke holes in it. And then the court can make a decision.


S14: I mean, why is that a great idea to have some kind of adversarial process within FISA proceedings? The reason that it doesn’t exist is it’s not in the statute, which does not mean that that’s like a good reason and that you are not, like, smart to be thinking of that as one solution to this problem.


S6: I mean, the other thing is whether defendants should at least have after the fact access to these applications and records similar to the way that defendants do in criminal proceedings. And maybe there’s a way to do make do both of those reforms. And I also just want to point out that in 2018, there were eighteen hundred and thirty three targets of FISA orders, including two hundred and thirty two Americans.


S8: So we’re not we’re focusing on this problem because of Carter Page, but it’s actually like a much bigger problem that civil libertarians have been worrying about for years and that, you know, a lot of people who kind of defend the establishment of the national security apparatus post-9/11 have been saying like, oh, don’t worry about this. You know, the Justice Department is on its best behavior. They have all kinds of reasons to make sure they’re doing this properly. But in fact, like we know that the FISA court in 2018 only rejected one FISA application. And we can see here what the. Eighteen hundred. It was actually out of a thousand and eighty requests in twenty eighteen one.


S11: Holy moly for holy.


S20: Yes. As according to government records, the court fully denied only one.


S21: Well.


S16: Wow. And, you know, when the arguments that you guys were making about Pfizer and many others were making was, I think, implicit in them or even you, you may have been making them explicitly, which is if you if you let the elasticity in your sweat pants expand, ultimately it loses all shape and power only encourages you to use more power. And so you could make the case that the FBI got so sloppy because it was just encouraged to be sloppy because no one was ever watching. This is, in fact, so and now many of the people who are defending the president supported the looseness of the Pfizer system before when it was when it was thought of as something that basically allowed law enforcement to to have the tools to fight terrorists, that that looseness that it encouraged is now hurt somebody that they would like to defend. This, though, is a cousin to the argument basically the Democrats are making about the president is that his behavior represents a pattern and then escalating comfort with the use of power against norms and practices. And that what happens when you do that is you don’t stop doing it. Power just gets more hungry and you keep using it and you keep blowing through and you end you end up accumulating an aggregate amount of abuses when you do this over time. So actually, there’s a related way in which these are connected.


S11: I want to point out one hypocrisy which really irritates me. We have in Bill Barr, Bill Barr has and and the president himself have been unloading on the FBI and just attacking the the agency, attacking agents, attacking the leadership of it, talking about the the president. The president case in the president’s allies, talking about the deep state a lot. And the question, their competence and the president course is also done, this with all the National Security Agency and the fine people who work there. On the one hand, and on the other hand, Barr recently gave a speech in which he talked about how communities where police weren’t adequately supported might not get policed. That, in fact, if you if you’re in a community and you you maybe there’s a Black Lives Matter protest in that community, maybe the cops won’t be do such a good job protecting that community because the cops won’t feel they’re getting support. And the hypocrisy and wrongheadedness, a bar on the one hand, completely undermining the people who work for the FBI and attacking their integrity. These agents, these law enforcement agents, on the other hand, the the idea that anyone who would attack the integrity of cops or attack the integrity of any local police investigation does not deserve police protection. Just irritates me. Just registering.


S17: There’s a way I went to bill bars like I’m emerging as the kind of Dick Cheney slash Donald Rumsfeld figure of the Trump administration. And part of it is that when you have a president who doesn’t seem super crafty and skillful, which I think was true about our image of George Bush and our image of Donald Trump, you imagine some puppeteer behind the scenes who’s kind of pulling the strings and we’re kind of headed in that direction. What we’re learning about Bill Barr. And then I think also there’s just the notion of having the attorney general, the chief law enforcement official in the country so willing to turn the might of the department into a weapon that he’s using on behalf of Trump personally. Now, I mean, given Bill Barr’s utter devotion to the power of the presidency and his belief that it’s under assault, which is another thing he’s been talking about in speeches. I think that Barr feels like he is defending the office. But the holder of the office is Donald Trump. He’s the one benefiting from it. And so he Barr is just emerged as this important and fascinating figure in all this adjacent to what you’re saying, or maybe just picking up on your second point.


S9: And I know you weren’t saying this, but the distinction, of course, is that Cheney didn’t have those obligations that you just pointed out about Barr.


S22: You know, and he does, it seems to me, have particularly in this moment. And this is why it strikes me that he that he did. Oh, yeah. The I.G. Some professional restraint, because the I.G. As I understand it talked to Durham. He incorporated their skepticism about his ultimate findings about the Predator, whether the investigation was predicated fairly or not. He heard them out. And then Drew, you know, came to his conclusions. So it’s a matter of that is up for debate as opposed to the I.G. Harwood’s. You know, going off in some crazy notion. But so when it’s a matter for debate to rush in and say, well, I disagree without providing evidence raises these big questions. And that throws the weight of the attorney general, essentially the whole weight of the institution puts a big question mark up there. And in this time of constant question marking. Which is no good for the justice system just in general. It seems to me there is some obligation for the attorney general to kind of bolster the idea that facts and a 400 page report has some standing, has some weight to not stick with that obligation at some level seems a real break with with what the responsibilities of the JUMAA get faithlessness.


S18: You get bonus segments on our podcast. Others like podcasts. Here, slate dot com. Flush gabfests.


S11: Plus, you can become a member today. Today we’re not talk about anti-Semitism or maybe the phyllo anti-Semitism or the anti Phylis Semitism or the anti anti-Semitism of the Trump presidency. Just the weird, weird nature relationship of the Trump presidency and Jews.


S18: So go to slate.com slash gaffe, plus join today.


S11: In perhaps the most obvious example of a no clothes emperor situation that I can remember, The Washington Post this week published The Afghanistan Papers, which is a collection of thousands of pages of documents comprising what are called lessons learned, interviews that were done secretly by certain government agencies, and also memos from former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld all about the war that never ends, never will. And in Afghanistan. The Post won these papers with very dogged and very expensive reporting and litigation. And let us note that the government behaved abominably, hid stuff it shouldn’t been hiding, forced the post to spend tons of money on legal fees that shouldn’t had to spend. And let’s give great credit to Craig Whitlock, the reporter who did such hard work to get this these papers and give great credit, the product which reveals the wasteful, pointless, ill conceived nature of a war that that has been going on now for 18 years, 18 years, 18 years. Incredible. So the primary conclusion of the Afghanistan papers is that two trillion dollars, if you add if you go all in on what what these wars have cost, this war has cost. And thousands of lives lost, Americans and others, many more. Thousands of Afghan lives. And there is literally nothing to show for it. And that we have a government has consistently lied about numbers, not no numbers, didn’t have accurate numbers spent wastefully, didn’t know who was on their side, had no consensus on their worth objectives or how to achieve those objectives. And careen from strategy to strategy under different presidents and different generals. And really, it’s been a complete, complete and utter waste, which I think any person, any person who kind of honestly looked at it as a person who’s been alive during that period and looked at it would have said, yeah, that’s pretty clear. This is this country is a mess and we have not really done anything. John, you’re about to interrupt me.


S13: I was with you until I was with you. But because my my what makes this so powerful to me is that there was a period where Afghanistan was the good war. Right. It was referred to by Democrats and Republicans alike as the way you’re supposed to do it. So that’s that’s Julia Reed that every month spoke up because. Right. No, no, no. Not for like three months, for much longer than that. There was, you know, Barack Obama when he opposed the the war in or in Iraq, said favorable things about Afghanistan. That’s what makes this even even more powerful, is that it’s an 18 year mistake that goes across both administrations and not just the administration. You kind of had it in their lap once they. Which is to say the Obama administration, you know, had it in their lap and had to deal with it. That has a certain set of complexities. But even before that was happening and even people who didn’t have responsibility for the policy were sort of treating Afghanistan as if it were, you know, the well carried out operation. And I don’t know whether that’s because they were they were being untruthful or they were just accepting the facts that we now know from this were totally rosy up from the start.


S11: What’s astonishing is that everyone so there was an interesting and probably useful good premise for the war initially. I mean, that’s where al-Qaeda was. That’s where Osama bin Laden was. That’s where the 9/11 attacks were planned. That’s the Taliban with a very bad government. And they had sheltered that sheltered these folks who attacked the United States. So there is a good premise for what the war, why the war is being fought. But once the kind of initial victories are won, there was really no idea about what to do next. And all you needed to do is look at history. And the history was the British in Afghanistan in the 19th century just completely getting walloped and driven out of there and slaughtered and not being able to conquer it and not being able to occupy it, not being able to have it. And the Russians just the decade or two ago, having more or less the same thing happen to them. We are like, remember how when we were kids in the early 80s and how it was kind of gleefully Americans talked about the Afghanistan war the Russians were in and how like look at them being humiliated by the the these tribal guerrilla fighters. And we really we we celebrated it are concerned about the Cold War mentality.


S5: That’s what we are. We’re that.


S23: Except we’ve been there twice as long, three times as long and spent more than two to 10 times as much money. Yeah. And me and a lot of people, it’s been killed.


S13: It’s, you know, one terrible. You said there was a good premise. I was struck when Stan McChrystal after Obama fired him, who is leading the NATO operations in Afghanistan. Some number of months later basically said that upon reflection, that he thinks that basically the U.S. should have, after the attacks of 9/11 toward the world as the aggrieved party and spent basically a year or so building an enormous coalition, understanding what was at stake and delaying that first, you know, hit back reaction, because, A, you could have built the coat, you could’ve built the support to if you ultimately had to take military action, you would have had a kind of a much tighter. Although the world was obviously behind the U.S. after hit being hit on 9/11, but that you might have avoided some of these mistakes maybe. And I wonder whether the lesson because because as the as the report suggests, this is you know, there are a lot of echoes here of the Pentagon Papers and of Vietnam. And so that initial instinct that that to hit back or to take military action seems to be a lesson that policymakers keep getting wrong. And and that seems to be the big the big challenge here. And I must say, upon reading this, I thought if you wanted to craft an argument for Donald Trump, it would be pretty easy because you would say, you know, I wanted to get out of Afghanistan. I wanted to get out of these wars. And I keep being told, were there all these reasons why we have to stay? And it’s basically the. End of the eighteen years of reasons why we have to stay, which really doesn’t work. And by the way, those of you who are saying I should, you know, stop breaking these norms and I should follow these procedures and do things the old way. Well, here’s that. The old way it got us is 18 years of. Lies of. I mean, maybe if you read the post report here, which is based on a thorough government report, basically lies misdirection, misunderstanding, confusion, which ain’t just about sort of public behavior and propriety. This is about life and death of people. And what do we have to show for it? It seems to me this is the could be the heart of essentially the Donald Trump presidency pitch.


S24: Yeah. Yeah. I mean, we’ll blow it all up because. And. Yeah.


S25: I’ll shut up.


S20: The one thing that just I can’t get past is the response in military times of a couple of the current military leaders, including Joint Chiefs of Staff Army Gen. Mark Milley. So he is this week telling reporters that he hadn’t read all of the Afghanistan papers story yet, but he disagreed that the public had been manipulated. And it’s he’s still saying it’s going well.


S6: He’s still saying we’re making progress here, even though he is one of the people in the Afghanistan papers who is hyper critical and talks about how it’s going terribly. And this is all a bunch of lies, like how are we supposed to believe anything that comes out of the mouths of these military officials when they just remain in lockstep and can’t like IG knowledge? They’re their own sick past statements.


S5: Right. But there’s there’s this great collection of quotes in the papers of people saying we’re making progress just year after year after year.


S8: One of them made such an important point along the way that when everyone who comes before you says, we fulfilled the mission, we’re making progress. You can’t be the person to say the emperor has no clothes. You have to keep in step with that set of false claims.


S22: And I should I should say that the where president where this breaks down as argument for President Trump is that he then falls susceptible to exactly what you just articulated. Emily, when when the president went to Afghanistan on Thanksgiving, he said that the U.S. would not leave until there was total victory.


S24: Well, no, he’s near total victory. What does that mean? He meant pixelation.


S13: Well, whatever, you know, even if he meant I mean, you read this and and I could imagine lots of people reading all of this and saying, hey, capitulation is fine, let’s cut our losses. Because the way we the way we’ve been defining this previously has led to what’s what’s recounted here in this incredibly damning collection. But but the but the president is was doing when talking about total victory, what you just described, Emily, and certainly what we what we encourage and reward in presidential campaigns, which is lots of displays of, you know, I’m in a bomb, the bleep out of ISIS and I’m going to do this and do that. All of the all of the militarization of macho campaign rhetoric sets, sets an expectation which then presidents have to fulfill once they get in office or B, you know, claim to be weak and that that dynamic sets up the conditions that then leads.


S8: It seems to me to a lot of what we read in this report, I mean, is this all about not having the draft anymore, like most Americans are disengaged? I mean, there was some high percentage of people who didn’t even know we were still fighting in Afghanistan. I don’t think I care and think enough about this. And if my kids lives were on the line, I would be paying a lot more attention.


S11: Right? Well, certainly a draft would have some of that impact, but there are only 13000 troops in Afghanistan. And so that. The chances that your child, in fact, would be going Afghanistan are going to be very low. But but a draft in general does have the effect of distributing the emotional cost and pain to the whole population.


S14: I guess there’s this part of me that doesn’t understand what it would mean to have a recognition that what we really are doing is being a kind of long term police presence. And this is a question I have about Syria, too. I’m not sure whether that’s right.


S6: I’m completely not informed enough to make an assessment, but when when there’s no strategy and no sense of what the end is. If we were defining our presence differently, what kind of impact would that have?


S19: OK. I just want to close this with making one other or one point five other points. I’ve often asked myself the question, which is what would have happened had we literally done nothing in response to 9/11? And I actually am convinced that the world would be a better place if there had literally been no response. It would be better than the response that the world that we’ve created. Now, I know that’s an that’s could never have happened in there. The world would not have allowed it. Certainly what McChrystal described would’ve been better. But I actually think that literally, having done nothing, would have been better. But to continue on that. I wonder if the one of the lessons of the Afghanistan papers is not that Afghanistan was the mistake, but that Iraq. The mistake of Iraq was what allowed Afghanistan to become such a never ending mistake is that that we distracted ourselves with Iraq. And you can only. There’s a line in one of the Afghanistan papers which says you can only fight one, you only invade one country at a time. And we invaded Afghanistan and then we were like, well, let’s go and well, let’s invade another country. And the Iraq war really for about seven years just became the preoccupation, even as we were continuing to fight this other low level, lower level conflict in Afghanistan and Iraq got sort of resolved and more resolved. It’s a more stable country, not because we did such a good job, but just because it’s intrinsically a more stable country than Afghanistan is. And and it a lot and it just meant that we didn’t ever really focus on trying to get Afghanistan right or focusing on it or have the national attention focused on it the way it needed to be. So by the time people tuned into Afghanistan again, which was basically two thousand thirteen or so, you had 12 years of war and like no ideas what to do. And people are just like, oh, let’s just keep going because no one has any better ideas but that the Iraq distraction was the was necessary for it to continue as long as it did.


S14: That makes some sense. I mean, but didn’t Barack Obama sort of claim Afghanistan as the war that he was going to go fight and win or at least like make things much better for people in Afghanistan? And it just seems like that was a failure.


S7: It was a failure. Do you think either view that this will have the same impact as the Pentagon Papers, either on public trust in government or on the actual war fighting in the Pentagon Papers? Real impact wasn’t there solely on the Vietnam War as much as it was on people’s stop developing a greater mistrust for their government. Now, they don’t really trust the government anyway.


S23: So it’s not just trust to develop a pit for a goal of the government fall.


S14: And I also feel like this is where the draft missing makes a difference, that we’re not going to see the same kind of just like wave of revulsion. I mean, it took it took three years after the Pentagon Papers to get out of Vietnam, didn’t it?


S23: Yeah. So, I mean. Yes. Yeah.


S14: I mean, I didn’t. But we did start drawing down troops. Yeah. I mean. Right. It does not seem to me like it’s going to be the same kind of cataclysmic event for those reasons.


S9: This comes out in the context of a presidential campaign.


S26: And it seems think you know what? Emily talked about earlier.


S27: This is what happens when you’re president. You come in and there’s all this policy that exists. And what do you do? And Barack Obama tried to get out of the nation building program in Afghanistan. That’s what he wanted to do when he came in. And then he ended up halting the withdrawal of troops and announced that he was going to leave thousands of American troops in the country indefinitely.


S9: And so. That’s this is what the. This is what you have to wrestle with as a as president. And so we should recognize that. And this goes back also to to the questions about President Trump. He’s wrestling with all kinds of stuff we don’t know anything about. And so as this impeachment is going forward and people are making judgments about whether he when nobody’s watching, has U.S. interests and the values we we would all like in a president, everybody should figure out what they think about that, because there’s a lot of stuff he’s going to be doing that nobody’s watching because of the way the presidency works. And that’s true with this pending on sorry, with the Afghanistan papers, too. This should be the constant topic of conversation in the presidential campaign. And P. Bridget, we should have some interesting things to say, too, since he served in Afghanistan. And yet we probably won’t hear about it. I mean, we certainly don’t hear about it in presidential debates. But this raises all kinds of questions. And and and how do these candidates answer those questions? Because they’re going to face them when they get in office. So I wish this was a constant topic of conversation, but I think it will just totally disappear.


S21: Let’s go to cocktail chatter. When you are ignoring the Afghanistan war and chatting with your friends about something else, what we’d be chattering about. John DICKERSON.


S27: Well, I think we’re going to be chattering about the depressing news of Greenland’s ice sheet. So the losses in the ice sheet have sapped, toppled and are now in line basically with the higher sea level rise scenario. So why does this matter? Well. Greenland is the second largest contributor to sea level rise. And what struck me about this finding from the ice sheet, mass balance inter comparison exercise known at home is the I am b.i.g.. Not only is it show that sea level rises is is increasing and this matters. If you’ll remember from November, the Venice flooding that happened, Venice floods. But what’s happening now is it’s flooding more and more frequently than before. And so you have this jewel of a city that is threatened with people there, think, you know, ultimate extinction. So sea level rise, which added to the other effects of climate change, though, whether the winds and so forth creates issues for Venice and all coastal cities. But what struck me is that these findings were they come out after the United Nations governmental panel on climate change, which set a range of sea level rise. And this is at the high end. So not only is the sea level rising, but the gases are basically wrong and they’re wrong in the wrong way. In other words, you’d rather your gas be wildly over pessimistic and then have the reality come in under it. This is the opposite of that. And. And what struck me is that Michael Oppenheimer is at Princeton, basically says that even if you did everything you could today, which nobody is really doing in terms of mitigating the effects of climate change on sea level rise, it’s kind of baked in to 2050.


S9: So what’s baked in basically? And again, this is based on the old assumptions is that in 2050, 100 year floods, things that are supposed to happen, only one every 100 years will happen every year. So not only is the sea level higher, but then when you have a flood, it will be that much more egregious. And and that’s locked in now.


S4: That finding was released this week. Emily, what is your chatter? Couldn’t possibly be that gloomy.


S20: My chatter is about this really troubling set of facts that Justice Sonia Sotomayor called attention to this week. So in 2007, a court official in Louisiana for a state court of appeal committed suicide. And he said in his suicide note that part of what was troubling him so much was that the court he worked for had summarily denied appeals over 13 years filed by people who didn’t have lawyers. So these are called process petitions where people represent themselves. And what bothered this man so much was that these dismissals were happening. Judges were signing off on them without so much as a glance at the underlying petitions or any review of the merits of the cases.


S6: And so we’re talking about just like hundreds of petitions. And I it’s just so upsetting to think of that happening.


S17: And yet, in some ways, it’s not surprising because there is this huge volume of these kinds of self-represented petitions being filed, especially by people in prison who have time on their hands and often have little or no access to lawyers to help them. And, you know, it’s horrifying to think of just all of these petitions being judges signing off without paying attention. And obviously, like, that’s bad. It’s also a problem that I don’t think we’ve really figured out how to address. And, you know, the underlying issue here is that some of these many of these petitions have little chance of of the case winning. But some of them are about like factual claims of innocence and real issues. And Gideon, which is the 1960s case that established a right to a defense, to a lawyer, a defense lawyer, even if you can’t afford one. That was like a prosy petition filed by someone like writing this handwritten letter, essentially. So the idea that we have just a we’re allowing all of these petitions to just wash over the court system without any review and that it could lead to this kind of tragic event like a suicide. It’s just really upsetting.


S15: Well, I’ll be the cheerier member of the. My chatters about a story in The York Times headline, Finland is a capitalist paradise chamber or some all coarsen.


S11: Yes. And it’s the story of by this couple, a Brooklyn couple that moved back to Finland, unpartnered Finnish. And they had a child. They moved back to Finland and and then did a story about how great it is to live in Finland. We’ve all heard those stories, but moreover, how great it is to live in Finland and how good it is for business. And the point points they make are that the high taxes, which seem like, oh, my God, socialist, you know. Confiscation of private property actually take have an incredibly useful social effect that actually helps the economy, which that takes the burden off companies to deal with things like health care and benefits and insurance and child care and education and all the H.R. stuff that that company spent so much effort on and to focus on the things they need to do, which is be good businesses and that the public goods of education and child care and parental leave and infrastructure building are taken care by of the government, by the government. And that, it turns out, unleashes a kind of capitalism. It takes away a lot of the insecurity that people feel that keeps them in jobs they don’t want to stay in because that that’s where their insurance is. It keeps them from moving because they’re worried about what will happen if they move. And it allows a huge development of human capital because you have great schools and universities and just less anxiety and guarantees about health care and private talent flourishes. And people are not because people are not panicking about all the hard stuff they have to do just to get through life. And the very excellent piece. And it puts the lie to that. That claim often put up by conservatives that these countries are are, you know, ruining free enterprise or ruining entrepreneurship. In fact, when you have a certain amount of security, entrepreneurship flourishes because you know that if it doesn’t work out, you’re still gonna have health care and you’re still your kids are still gonna be able to go to good schools.


S4: So a great piece. I went to school twice with tribal course. Really? Mm hmm. While I’m in every school and high school.


S14: That’s why you wrote such a good piece.


S27: Yes, that’s exactly right. Exactly right. Who else has a great book on lobsters and sushi for those who are seeking the further readings?


S4: OK, is it called. Consider the lobster. Or no? That’s a David Foster Wallace book. It’s probably that book.


S28: There are a lot of great listener chapters this week. A lot of them. A lot of them. Thank you for sending them to us at that Slate gabfest. And the one I’m going to call out is from Ben Armstrong.


S11: Ben says, I hope you’re all doing well, which is nice. My listener chatter this week is it made? Listener chatters. This week’s Code Switch podcast by NPR, which includes a crazy and mostly forgotten story of the Reverse Freedom Rides. And as Ben goes on to say, the year after the Freedom Rides in 1961, Southern segregationists tricked a whole bunch of African-Americans in the South into taking bus rides to the north, primarily to New England, to harness the Kennedies hometown with a promise that there will be jobs and housing waiting for them. And it’s an amazing, amazing episode. I knew nothing about it. And in fact, it kind of failed because the northern communities, like they weren’t perfect, but they were very welcoming in general. And most of these families ended up resettling up in the north and were glad to be out of the segregated south. And it’s just an incredible episode and I think was on the order of 200 people ended up or 200 families ended up moving as part of this Reverse Freedom Ride program. There’s a podcast about it. And then there’s also an essay version and Bend notes with full disclosure that his wife was the reporter on the story. So good job. Ben and Gabrielle Emanuel.


S3: That’s our show for today. The gabfest is produced by Jocelyn Frank. Our researcher is Bridget Dunlap with the Kaplan helped me here in D.C..


S29: Did Ryan McCoy help you in New Haven? Emily, I bet you did. Thank you, Ryan. That Alan paying help you, John, at CBS.


S27: I bet he did a constant and steady presence.


S28: Gabriel Roth is editorial director of Slate podcast, June Thomas, his managing producer, who should follow us on Twitter. That’s like gabfests tweet chatter to us there. And please come next week, Wednesday night.


S30: If you’re near, Oakland, California will be the Fox Theater for annual conundrum show. It’ll be delightful. Slate.com flush live. For tickets for Emily Basilone and John DICKERSON and David Plotz. We will talk to you next week.


S18: Hello. Slate Plus, how are you? What’s going on? I don’t know. Not not sure.


S11: Anyway, Emily, you’ve been doing a lot of reading about the Semitism, the Semitism of the Trump administration. They have. Are they anti-Semitic? Are they follow Semitic? Are they both? What is the form of anti-Semitism? Trump said this incredible, outrageous things to Jewish audience about how they had to vote for him because they were Jews and real estate and they were killers and they didn’t like him. But what they were going to vote for Democrats because they’d lose money?


S23: Yeah. They all know what the wealth tax was going to force them.


S20: Almost many, many of them. The vast majority do vote for Democrats who raise their taxes and have for generations. Yeah. I mean, this is such a split screen administration about Jews and Judaism.


S6: On the one hand, you have. Yeah. anti-Semitism from the president that is affirming the most corrosive, damaging stereotype about Jews. And you have Jews in the administration who are among its most diabolical figures. Right. I mean, Steven Miller is Jewish and is the descendant of Holocaust survivors and yet is an architect of of the Trumpian immigration policy that has been so cruel to so many would be refugees and other migrants. And then you have the kind of spectacle of Jared Kushner, who is Jewish, married, of course, to Ivanka Trump, has converted to Judaism, and he has been pushing for a long time for greater protections for college students who feel like they are victims of anti-Semitism. And so the Trump administration put out with great fanfare an executive order. It doesn’t actually do that much in the end, but the reporting about it was really confusing. It sounds like probably some Trump officials described it inaccurately. And so the initial wave of coverage made it sound like the Trump’s the Trump administration had redefined Jews as a race or a nation unto themselves, which caused lots of outrage. Jews on Twitter to tweet that they are Americans and they want that to be their national identity. And really, what happened was not such a big deal. Basically, the Trump administration said that under title six of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, if Jews were targeted for reasons of national origin or race, meaning other people saw them that way, they would have protections against discrimination of the same ones that already go to groups like Hindus and Sikhs and Muslims. The bad part of this order, in my view, has to do with the very broad definition of anti-Semitism, where effectively examples include opposition to Israel that is very much covered by free speech. And in an op ed in The New York Times this week. Jared Kushner said anti-Semitism is the same thing as anti-Zionism, and that is just a really problematic position. People have to be able to oppose Israel’s policies and not have that necessarily be treated as anti Semitic. It is true that some people who oppose Israel then blur their opposition into being anti-Semitic. And it’s true that there are a lot of people, including Jews, who just object to Israel’s policies toward especially Palestinians, and they have lots of good reasons for that. So I think the genesis and kind of focus of a lot of this is the boycott divestment sanctions movement on college campuses. And that has like a mixed record. It has done some, I think, really good and important advocacy. And it has also blurred into some anti-Semitic incidents on some campuses.


S8: But I feel like this order. I mean, I hope that it just is one of those like overreaching moments that basically get set aside because of people’s First Amendment rights. But it just seems like the administration is trying to say to college campuses that they’re supposed to be cracking down on the p.d.’s movement in a way that just seems like way, way over the top and damaging and in the end, bad for the Jews.


S4: What I am so puzzled by this. I’m so I’m so puzzled by it all. It’s so depressing.


S11: It’s so hard because he you know, Trump has like he has a lot of Jews who are working for him. His son in law is Jewish, is his daughter is Jewish. His lead advisor on immigration is Jewish.


S21: There there are Jews in his cabinet and.


S11: I think there’s something so creepy about the way he personally deals with Jews that I find very unsettling. And and then I think the way in which Jews. So there’s this Jewish anxiety about anti-Semitism in the U.S., which is not unjustified because there’s been this rise of white nationalist anti-Semitism, which Trump fuels, but it’s made Jews feel their otherness in a way that I think we haven’t in the U.S. for a long time. A lot of Jews I know we’re now talking about how othered they feel. They don’t feel I’ve always felt American way before I felt Jewish. And I still do. But a lot of Jews I know don’t feel that way anymore. And I think Trump that the white nationalists who support Trump have contributed to that feeling. I don’t know. It’s awful.


S31: Emily, walk me through on the Steven Miller thing again is here is the argument about his influence over the treatment of migrants and refugees that he, because of his heritage, has a special responsibility to treat people who are displaced for political reasons. More with more fellow feeling or or is there another way in which his Jewish heritage is, is that he’s actually acting against his Jewish heritage?


S14: I mean, that the argument you just made, that would be my argument.


S17: And a month or so ago, Millar’s one of Miller’s uncles published an op ed saying like, this is such a betrayal of our family’s values and history and heritage. That’s how I see it. I mean, you know, I definitely admit that when I see Jews behaving in a way that I just find so disturbing. It bothers me more because I just feel like it’s gonna reverberate on all of us. And I think also just in that way that you feel about your own people some great sense of like closeness and responsibility. It’s not I don’t think it’s like the greatest instinct to have, but I do just like shudder to a different degree. And I you know, Steven Miller for me is a figure like that.


S21: Yep.


S31: Do you here’s here’s another version of this when I wonder if you go if you take it this far, which is that Miller by promoting a certains certain world view about the other. Whether it happens to be whether it’s immigrants or just people who are not sort of Western Europeans, that that create that that contributes to a larger climate, that encourages white nationalism, which is obviously for sure target yet targets Jews. Yes, it definitely does.


S19: And one of the interesting things about that are demoralizing things about that. Then Jews then do feel kind of legitimately do feel. That there’s rising anti-Semitism in the world and even in the U.S.. And they get anxious about it and not unjustifiably, there was this attack in in New York or New Jersey this week that was anti-Semitic, the attack on the synagogue in Pittsburgh. You know, mass murder, anti-Semitic. And I’m not at all saying that Jews should not be anxious about that or they shouldn’t be concerned and feel about that. But it is also the case that Jews in general in the United States are so, so much better off than these other people who are being targeted by the policies of Miller and this other kind of exclusionary and divisive things that Miller and Trump are doing, and that I feel like the worry about anti-Semitism and the anti-Semitism on college campuses, it is not that it’s not there. It’s definitely there. It did that. The anti-Semitism isn’t there. It is certainly there. It’s just that it’s that the worry about it in the attention to it is so out of proportion with the suffering and and bad stuff that’s happened to other groups and other people, refugees who were turning away and these children who are being detained and so forth. Right.


S8: I mean, there is Jewish energy going in the direction you’re saying. Right. So like my rabbi who just retired is very involved in those efforts.


S17: And, you know, he’s part of an interfaith coalition in Connecticut that works really hard on that. And you can point to really important principles within Judaism, like the idea of taking care of the stranger and being welcoming to the stranger. And then also the idea of tikkun olam like repairing the world. And there is a straight line. And I think what leaders like that see is a sense of proportionality and where anti-Semitism fits into this larger picture as opposed to having this more kind of myopic focus on the persecution, persecution of Jews.


S25: All right. Slate plus, good talking to you, calculator.


S7: From the campus of Yale University and her sinecure at The New York Times Magazine, non-ethnic.


S10: Because you have to work for it, OK? You’re not a cynic. You’re not a cynic. Yeah, it is a job. I don’t appreciate.


S32: That is the point.


S27: I didn’t I didn’t know what to do. Look, can I just weigh in on. Go ahead. I was once interviewed. I totally associate myself with Emily. And because I was once interviewed by somebody at NBC who once referred to my job at time as a Centacare, and I was like, screw you, buddy.


S10: Like, you make okay or even fucking it means you didn’t like me. I was trying to make a lot, I believe. But David is beyond that. And I think there is you have a dictionary, a position requiring little or no work giving the holder status or financial benefit. Okay. Fuck, you weren’t lucky. Oh my. I was high within. I get that horse right now. That’s all it was.


S25: Okay.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for October 17 2019.


S3: Don’t be a tough guy. Don’t be a fool. I will call you later Ed.. I am David Plotz of Atlas Obscura in Washington D.C. John Dickerson of CBS 60 Minutes chuckling. DICKERSON Ian Lee in Manhattan Hello. John Dickerson Hello David. John has his first 60 Minutes piece coming up this weekend so gabfest listeners make sure you check out 60 Minutes on Sunday.


S4: They go on for that Tune In Tune In plug. And joining us of course is Emily Bazelon of the New York Times Magazine and Yale University Law School from New Haven. Hello Emily.


S5: Hey.


S4: So glad to be here with you both on today’s gabfest. President Trump’s shocking abandonment of America’s Kurdish allies in Syria and the incredible series of catastrophic events that have unfolded from that then who if anyone won the fourth democratic debate then we will discuss a fascinating new book about whether meritocracy is destroying the United States.


S6: Plus of course we will have a cocktail chatter. One more note gaffe festers. When we first released last week’s episode I referenced a tweet in which a banker. Trump was quoted allegedly quoted criticizing Hunter Biden for getting a position through nepotism that quote It turns out was fabricated. I was wrong to read it. We removed it from our episode that same night and many of you probably heard the nice clean corrected version. But for those of you who didn’t. I am sorry. Please note that that quote was fabricated and shouldn’t have been there to begin with President Trump who betrays as easily and as regularly as most people eat snacks has outdone himself in the Middle East. The president gave a free path to took US president one then withdrew U.S. forces stationed with Kurds in northern Syria allowing Turkey and some of its allies in Syria to invade the North to rouse Kurds emboldening Russia emboldening Bashar Assad emboldening Iran releasing a whole bunch of people being held ISIS people being held by the Kurds. It is a catastrophic turn of events fully predicted fully anticipated by everyone who had looked at it. So John why did this happen even though everyone knew what was going to happen if he did it.


S7: Why did it happen. I think the macro is that the president doesn’t like messy U.S. activity and things that are complicated and unpleasant and this is a complicated and unpleasant business. I think people have also speculated that he has business interests in Turkey and therefore has to kind of listen to Taiwan more than then just a regular old leader of a country. But I think that it fits into his foreign policy worldview which is closer to kind of Rand Paul than Lindsey Graham. And I think he’s very impulsive and so despite all of the guidance from the experts around him saying that what would happen what has happened would happen. He hasn’t listened to those advisers and experts on a whole host of things. And so in this instance he didn’t listen either and I would just add the second level of which is a particularly predictable second generation thing that happens in the impulsive presidency which is that the president does something impulsively and then in the second stage you know the vice president rushes out and said that he didn’t do the thing that he just did. So the Vice President Pence said that President didn’t give a green light to the term. Brett McGurk who ran ISIS policy under Obama under Trump and also worked on the surge for George W. Bush has been boiling lead critical of President Trump for whom he worked and and he knows this issue better than anyone in mocking the idea that he didn’t give a green light. But I think that’s also a part of the cascading disaster of these things which is that something happens and then there’s a whole effort to claim the thing that happened didn’t just happen. Emily


S4: The House voted on Wednesday to rebuke the president for withdrawing troops that included. Most Republicans voted with Democrats on this rebuke and yet it doesn’t feel as though President Trump is is a going to reverse his policy. Well he can’t reverse that. I suppose it’s the policy is dead it’s too late it’s too late to reverse it right. It’s out of his hands. The glass is shattered and is on the floor but it also doesn’t feel that Republicans are going to hold him too much to account for this.


S5: Yeah it’s pretty amazing to watch the Republicans you know vote against him and isolate him in that sense and some of them like Graham and Marco Rubio etc. have been critical but they’ve been careful to make that criticism less personal in the last few days and not to extend it into other domains right. I mean if you really want to condemn Trump over this Republicans have lots of other levers they can pull they don’t want to do that they don’t like the politics of that. I think given Trump’s high approval rating among Republicans and they don’t want to undermine their own domestic agenda or give any tools to the Democrats and so I think that we’re seeing one of the most striking and I would say shocking examples where partisan politics are outweighing any kind of institutional concerns about the foreign policy establishment the traditional views of the Republican Party on the Middle East and these kinds of interventions this particular intervention which had bipartisan support and then the prerogative of Congress right. That kind of idea that Congress would want to have a bigger say here and really try to impact events that seems to also be going effectively by the wayside.


S4: I think there’s a recognition implicit in what you’re saying Emily that that also this is not an issue on which Americans vote yes that Kurds. It is absolutely true. This is something that that people in the establishment people who care about America’s interests abroad people who care about the legitimacy of American diplomacy and the use of American military power from a kind of macro perspective care about a lot but American voters are not up at night worrying about the Kurds even though it’s a tremendous betrayal just a tremendous embarrassing shameful betrayal. But but the number of people who will who will stop Bain for President Trump because of it is in no small handfuls although why are we so sure.


S5: I mean I share your assumptions about that and yet why are we so sure of that when we have these stories and images of ISIS prisoners and their relatives escaping like I thought one thing Americans did care about with regards to foreign policy was preventing terrorism and this is the most direct threat I can see. Since 9/11. I mean it just seems like for an American president to have effectively created the conditions for all of this instability and for actually like freeing ISIS prisoners. That seems like it should be grabbing people by the throat.


S4: And John why do you think conservatives and voters are not losing their minds about this.


S8: Well I think they. There is some.


S9: Some people are losing their minds in part because you have some people who are not the usual suspects being critical.


S7: So Lindsey Graham is kind of in both camps but he’s been highly critical.


S9: And and so I think that.


S7: But but you know mostly everybody has stuck behind the president and I think one important thing is to separate means and ends here. Let’s imagine for a moment that we were that you agree with the idea of getting out of foreign intervention in foreign lands the way in which this was done has required U.S. forces to bomb their own ammunition dumps because it was done so hastily that the U.S. now is bombing its own ammunition dumps because they don’t have the trucks to remove the ammunition because the trucks are busy beating a hasty retreat. The the status of the fifty U.S. nuclear weapons which are at the Incirlik Air Base in Turkey is now an open question and. And that should make everyone quite nervous. So and by the way though as David mentioned the betrayal of allies you know thinking we talked last week about the president’s quip that the Kurds weren’t with America at the landing in Normandy on D-Day in 1944. So a couple of things. They were with the U.S. much earlier which is to say they are the more recent allies than than Normandy which is the first thing and they are being betrayed after they were the solution. Remember in the previous world where the U.S. was tired of foreign engagement but knew as Emily mentioned that there are no walls anymore. The president this week said well that there 7000 miles away. But the point of 9/11 everybody was supposed to have learned was that oceans don’t protect America anymore. Nevertheless the president is back to that sort of as David Sanger wrote the kind of 1930s mindset of the way countries operate together. But there was a period when because America was war weary the Kurds were the answer. And everybody was all for basically having the Kurds do the work. But the idea of the Kurds doing the work and then being betrayed is is I think something people might not be excited about as a political matter. But I generally think that you guys have got it right that people are going to are more concerned about other or other matters. I would just make one other final point which is that if you are a believer in shrinking America’s footprint overseas and the necessity of doing that when it’s done in such a hasty and and disordered manner which leads to the death of former U.S. allies you include the ability to have an actual debate about where U.S. foreign policy should take place because it’s so calamitous it obscures your ability to to actually have the debate you should be having which is a perfectly fine and reasonable one to have. So even if you’re on the president’s side in terms of his ends his means of making a rational conversation about that almost impossible.


S4: But but also John I would note that that there is not a consistency there in the sense that President Trump just this week or last week also put 2000 U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia correct. So there are a thousand who may get pulled out of northern Syria are more than made up for by the extra thousand the extra two thousand that are now in Saudi Arabia. So so there isn’t it. There isn’t a there’s not a principle here. There’s a series of impulsive decisions which I think I do think Emily you’re right that he doesn’t like the messiness and he doesn’t like to have to deal with decisions around death and and ugliness. But you’re actually I think he’s super guided by principle. One of the questions I have for either of you but Emily I’ll give it to you first. What is it that President Trump should have done. You had heard Juan who very much wanted to to clear out northern Syria to to push away what he perceived as a threat from Kurds and from Kurds who wanted to undermine his government and Turkey in northern Syria. And he was hankering to do it. Very eager to do it planning to do it. What should the U.S. have done to discourage that.


S5: I mean I think they could have we could have just continued to say it or Taiwan like no you don’t get to come into this territory and in some kind of indefinite way just like hold the status quo. I mean that would have meant using American troops as a kind of police force. But that’s what those thousand troops were doing there. And it seems like they were actually successful in creating quite a bit of stability in a very unstable situation with a small number of people. But if you decide you’re going to leave and there are reasons to leave and to think that over the long term this whole like that it was very shaky the dynamic between the Kurds Assad in Syria and Taiwan and Turkey. OK. Then have everyone sit down and do a planned withdrawal and give the Kurds a chance to make an alliance with Assad if that’s what they are going to do. In a way that’s in the interests of American policy as well as preserving stability and just make sure that like all these people don’t get killed and left holding the bag in a way that makes us look like we are just completely unreliable and disorganized and gives Russia this opportunity to fill this power vacuum. Trump has said that he’s completely untroubled by that. Like let Russia come into the neighborhood and fix these problems if it wants as he washes his hands and says it’s not our problem at all. But that just seems incredibly short sighted as a matter of protecting American interests in the medium to long term. And I’m struck as always by the choice of the kind of short term there won’t be a cost with Trump’s base. He gathers verses like any kind of sense that diplomacy and foreign affairs have medium to long term ripple effects and history is going to judge you based on those questions as well as what happens to your immediate political fortunes. It’s just like absent.


S7: Here’s one way I think that politically some things may be changing and this argument’s been out there for a while which is that some Republicans who are never tempers have said in an effort to convince their former comrades in arms. Okay let’s stop fighting over the last over the first Trump term because the trajectory of the presidency has been ever escalating towards new forms of chaos. Imagine what that would be like over eight years. So the argument is let’s stop it at four because it has only gotten crazier when John Kelly Rex Tillerson and Paul Ryan all say that the most important thing they did during the Trump era was keep the president from doing things. You now see in Syria and Turkey evidence of what happens when he is left to do what whatever he pleases and then also you can imagine that is true with Ukraine as we learn more and more how the president created essentially parallel foreign policy that was outsourced to Rudy Giuliani and an obsessive hunt for something that career officials say was a complete fantasy that that if this is the escalating pattern you don’t want four more years of that. I think that with daily evidence here and some charismatic dissenters could change the political picture that you described Emily. I don’t think it does anything to the people who are who are fully locked into President Trump. But I do think that those you know the suburban Republicans might be affected by that kind of argument.


S4: I want to make a couple of final points and actually ask one question here. So one of the things that I think this episode points to. It doesn’t explicitly reveal it but it points that is how effective lobbying and cronyism is with this administration that we’ve seen and we’ve seen this with M.B.A. and Jared Kushner around Saudi issues and now I think we see with Giuliani and Michael Flynn on Turkish issues where it looks sort of smells like Flynn was clearly a paid lobbyist for the Turks was working for the Turks and it feels like Giuliani when when we get deep in this we’re going to discover that Giuliani is either directly or indirectly working for Turkish interests that that one of the things that you seem to be able to do with this administration is if you pick the right person who is close to the president you can kind of get him to do the bidding of somebody particularly that someone is a strong man who is kind of a charismatic strong man.


S5: And if there are business interests involved there’s money to be made right. I mean that’s what we see also with these relationships.


S4: Right. Right. It is demoralizing to think that there is a that the first thing that’s being done is that these governments are putting money into that that the decisions are not being made in the greater interest of the United States. But in the interests of some sort of shadowy force and President Trump’s financial interests. And that’s depressing. And that’s just not how it’s supposed to be. That is one kind of obvious point the second is I did not realize till I was doing the reading about this that there were these huge camps for ISIS. Well obviously ISIS fighters who mostly men who who have been detained and are being held in really pretty dismal conditions but also the wives and children in particular. 70000 yes being held in a camp and I’m not saying that you know they didn’t make bad life choices that the wives didn’t make bad life choices that their husbands didn’t make bad life choices of course they probably did. But there are tens of thousands of children who were just among the many many millions of refugee victims in this world who are living in these terrible conditions in these camps and can’t go anywhere can’t do anything. Lives being ruined and it’s just a shame I don’t have a particular solution about it but it’s it’s just a shame.


S5: You know this is a slightly different topic but it’s related one of the other pressures that allowed her Taiwan to have domestic support for this invasion and Syria are 3 million Syrian refugees in Turkey especially in border towns but also in Turkish cities and as Turkish. Turkey’s unemployment rate rises and I’m taking much of this from a really good column by Max Fisher in The New York Times. The rising unemployment rate has created domestic unrest about these refugees and that’s part of why Taiwan invaded. And you know this is this giant global problem of Refugee Resettlement in which western countries that are further away from conflicts like Syria don’t do their fair share and they rely on these poor border countries to absorb the cost. And the problem of mass refugee resettlement and then of course that’s going to affect domestic political conditions in Turkey. So I just feel like it’s important to think about that larger just unsolved problem that the international order does not cooperate about.


S7: I’m going to make one final very quick find I hope on just the scorecard here of of the president and how his impulsivity clashes with the presidency. First on your point David ProPublica did an analysis this week when I interviewed the president as a candidate I asked him if he would Doc he would not hire lobbyists as president. And he said that he would not hire lobbyists. He’s had 281 which I believe is a record for this period in a presidency. So that’s a ancillary point ancillary point to your point which is my Oh I won’t do that.


S10: Two hundred and eighty one hires later.


S7: Yeah. And so that’s I know. And obviously this is the president talked about draining the swamp. So there’s that. But to to other related points on the president as a negotiator and a manager you know one of the arguments for his candidacy is he was from the business world. He knew how to negotiate as a manager what we see here in the disordered presidency is what happens is the president makes an impulsive move and then everybody has to stop what they’re doing and go manage it. And that’s not the way he as I understand it from talking to people who are actually in business. That’s not usually the best way to run a railroad. Secondly as a matter of negotiating the letter that you referred to in the title of the show this week is a letter the president wrote on the 9th of this month to Taiwan trying to basically keep him from doing what he then went ahead and did. And the president is often referred to his gut and his skill for negotiating with other powerful people. And in this instance it seems to me the president has left him one of two options either one he just opened the door to Taiwan and let him do what he wanted to do but now that he claims that’s not what he did then it seems to implicit in saying I didn’t know he was going to do this or I didn’t give him the green light to do that is that he was then ignorant of the fact that erm Taiwan was going to do what everybody clearly expected him to do including including everybody in his national security apparatus.


S11: So as a negotiator This is not one of the things that would be in the second volume of art of the deal and then we have to say Ah I feel like I have to say this is all taking place against the backdrop of quite extraordinary revelations from various people in the state department about all the Ukraine shenanigans that are the basis for the impeachment inquiry. And what we’re seeing from these officials I think is first of all a decision to defy the White House counsel’s order not to comply with these subpoenas. And I think what you see is this undercurrent of incredible frustration and concern from people who’ve served the country in our diplomatic corps and just feel like the like they don’t understand how the foreign affairs can be run the way Trump is running them and that they have no choice but to speak out.


S6: Hey listeners I want to remind you that our annual conundrum show our favorite live show is coming up on December 18th in Oakland California at the Fox Theater Tickets that showered Slate dot com slash life. And you can also send your conundrums to us by tweeting to us. That’s like Gap fest with hashtag conundrum or going to Slate dot com slash conundrum. To submit your conundrums we’ve already gotten some amazing conundrums submitted by our audience. So here’s one that we may maybe we’ll consider. Would you rather only be able to read books published before you were born or published during your lifetime. Good question. Resurrection or reincarnation which would you prefer. That is a hard one. That’s a really well we do not know that. Go ahead.


S8: I was about to respond but now I don’t want to leave it for the show.


S6: Yeah. Leave it for the show. Domesticated pets have now become the overlords of the earth. Would you rather be ruled by cats or by dogs or maybe by guinea pigs or snakes.


S12: Definitely not guinea pigs.


S6: I hate guinea pigs and we’ll get into it. We would we will get into it at the Fox Theater in Oakland December 18th. Slate dot.com flash live for tickets. Can’t wait to see you there.


S13: There was a big Democratic debate in Ohio on Tuesday by big I don’t mean that it mattered more than other debates.


S4: I just mean that there were a lot of people onstage that were ridiculous. Twelve candidates onstage which I think is the biggest number ever for a debate including Tom Steyer who should be ashamed of himself that he’s not putting his one point six billion dollars to better use than this self aggrandizement of his pseudo presidential campaign. But whatever he is that he’s entitled to it free country. JOHN DICKERSON Give me two takeaways from that debate. Who want it.


S8: It doesn’t have to be who wanted me to do well Elizabeth top to Dick persona and takeaways Elizabeth Warren got the front runner treatment and there is still nervousness about front runner Joe Biden.


S4: Emily Warren as John just hinted had a target on her back the whole night. Notably the target was. How are you going to pay for your Medicare for all. Senator Warren what’s your sense about how she handled it. Was it in a satisfactory way was she was she ducking. Was she deceptive. Was she OK.


S5: I think she handled it great because I do think she’s ducking and I don’t really understand this whole situation she’s created for herself like if she’s going to go all in with Bernie. Then I think she has to go all in and say yeah your taxes are going to go up which is what he is forthright about. But I don’t understand the politics of getting this far behind Medicare for All which is not plausible as something the Democrats are going to pass in any short term way. And it seems to me like both club and people to judge have a better handle on the politics and a really good way of talking about this issue. But she rejected that explicitly. And I have been thinking that she’s going to figure out some way to kind of walk back from Bernie’s version of Medicare for All which is you know in four years replacing our entire health care system as I understand it. But I feel like she’s leaving herself less and less wiggle room. And so then if you’re gonna do that like admit that it’s going to cost all this money. So that was my feeling about that part of the debate though I am also really tired of all the airtime. This issue is getting in debates when questions like climate change are just not getting asked at all right.


S4: No climate change no voting rights.


S8: Yeah although e what I mean. So you agree on that. And then secondarily that that even though they’ve spent so much time talking about it no one has very good answers. What are the things that she doesn’t. Do you feel like the rest of them do.


S14: Not rule it out.


S8: Yes I don’t fight. I don’t find them. I don’t I well let me let me clarify what I mean by not very good answers. First I think on what you said about Elizabeth Warren I got that I get the feeling it feels like the her position on Medicare for all is this is signaling as much as anything else so maximalist and not even allowing the possibility that there are going to be any costs puts her in a kind of special category as the most of the most details kind of schmoe tales in a way. But and and the vagueness. I’m all for a little vagueness in in campaigning because of course you need that in the presidency FDR and Lincoln in particular were irritatingly vague to their allies but also to their enemies. You need room to maneuver but if you’re going to be vague you then also have to be effective which is to your point Emily which is that if you’re going to Shelley Shelley and not answer as Bernie Sanders does which is to say yes your taxes will go up but because you’re not paying premiums your net outflows and expenditures on health care costs will actually go down. That’s a pretty fast sentence. And that’s essentially what Warren is saying.


S15: But she does some kind of sleights of hand which make it sound like she’s being even more I don’t want to say your taxes will go up even if she says in the next breath or the first breath that your costs will go down.


S8: But what would I. The reason I am focused on effectiveness is that if this is ever going to happen somebody has to make the case for how this is actually going to happen. Bernie Sanders argues that he’s going to create a revolution and that’ll put so much pressure on the political system that it’ll actually happen. OK. That’s a you know Barack Obama tried that. The Affordable Care Act had some some troubles because even when he was able to create a political movement it still couldn’t get through the process for a variety of reasons. But moving past that if Elizabeth Warren is going to create the kind of outside pressure to get this done she’s going to need to be it seems to me a more effective advocate for the idea of Medicare for all than merely just assertion politics and in a primary of course that’s what you’re trying to do. But this this these debates are a chance to get a look at whether she will be able to sell something to people who are not already in the Medicare for all camp.


S7: And I don’t. That’s why I. That’s why I say no matter how much they’ve talked about Medicare the pitch that would actually work in a way that would actually move politics in Washington hasn’t felt like to me to be strong enough that’s fair from her.


S5: But I still feel like Buddha judge and club star and actually Kamala Harris. You know I forget the details of their plan. The idea that you can have Medicare for all who want it and that you start with is letting people opt in so they can decide whether this works for them and whether they feel like if it goes well then like yeah you end up with Medicare for all because everybody opts in. But as Buddha does keep saying like you trust people to make choices and kind of respect the fact that it’s not crazy to fear that this isn’t going to go well and to want to see it play out.


S4: First let let me change the subject here for a second or maybe for more than a second because I don’t want us to in our discussion of this debate replicate the problems of the debate which was to discuss Medicare for all. Too much Joe Biden is the front runner by most or by many measures as the front runner in this race. But he is fading out from this campaign in such a weird way. I expected that he would fade out with a series of kind of really stupid gaffes that would be terribly embarrassing and would distract attention instead it just seems to be you know with with ice not with fire its meandering slow confused answers. It’s just a kind of unimpressive ness that is lack of dynamism that is going to take him down.


S15: Yeah it’s dispiriting to watch right.


S4: And it’s it’s like I mean I’m sorry just I just to finish the point. I mean I feel like it’s it’s so Sanders had the heart attack but almost like Biden had the heart attack and it’s weird how poorly and how slowly and weakly he has campaigned well and in the debate I noticed it on two fronts that seemed like he should have been armed to the teeth with exactly the answer and the delivery.


S15: The first was the question about his son Hunter Biden like of course they’re going to ask that and he answered it was OK. But not like a home run by any means. And then the same on Syria. He just seems so weak kneed in that moment. But he is the one who knows all about this and like he’s right that he has sat down with the players and was on the inside of thinking about this and the Obama administration. And so do you hear him give some kind of like waffling answer that I like. Well I’d go talk to Assad and like I don’t know it just felt so ineffectual and that surprised me.


S8: Yeah. You know one of the ways in which deals with Warren is powerful and people seem to think that she didn’t have a great night defending against all the incoming that she was getting. But I. But her argument that basically Democrats succeed when they you know put grit and determination behind what they believe you know that’s the kind of religion you want to sell in a primary. And the Biden rebuttal which we saw break out into the open and in and you know kind of curious exchange where she was talking about the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. And Biden said I got you those votes was a little microcosm of the larger fight which is Warren basically saying if you have the grit and determination and belief of your convictions you’ll get it to happen. And Biden saying basically you got to work in the system and know how to get the votes. If his argument is work in the system and get the votes the first problem is a that system doesn’t really exist anymore in the in the level of partisanship we have now. And in a sense it doesn’t. It seems to me that that he’s on the incrementalist side with bitter judge and Klobuchar. And and so if you’re going to be the incrementalist it seems to me you’ve got to kind of make a somehow make a case. And then of course the other thing is you know against Donald Trump. I don’t think that that the the Biden responses have it would be you know it’s just not in the same category as what.


S4: What would you would face in the general election. Emily do you think booted edge or Klobuchar is positioned himself well enough to to be the viable moderate alternative to Warren that Biden is so clearly on the outs. I’m just presuming that probably not true. I’m always wrong about these things. But the Biden is so clearly on the outs that one of them will emerge as a sort of reasonable more centrist alternative.


S15: It would be better if they could be smushed into one person. Right. Like if you had someone who had the experience of cloture and the track record of winning bipartisan support in you know purple Midwestern state and then you had like Buddha judges military record and his sharpness on the debate stage and kind of youthful exciting bright shiny object qualities like that would be a good candidate. But separately they both have weaknesses. I mean Buddha judges raised a lot of money and he’s obviously doing better than club star in the polls.


S5: So I guess he seems like the more viable alternative but I just wonder whether Democrats are really going to get behind someone who is the mayor of a pretty small city in the end.


S7: Now I’m going to make the Pro Joe Biden case that has nothing to do with debates. And I think it goes something long.


S10: Wow. As you say most most controversial thing John will ever say on the show saying it.


S8: So it goes I think it goes something like this why I’ve been thinking obviously a hard about the you know the changes in presidencies whoever if the president is not re-elected whoever comes in next it comes into a different kind of presidency than previous presidents would have come into. And so there is going to be a lot of repair and a lot of Norm resetting and alliances are going to have to be handled and dealt with. There’s just going to be more reclamation work because this president has gleefully and self-proclaimed oddly run a disruptive chaotic presidency perhaps the person who knows where the family heirlooms go when you walk back through after the hurricane has been through who knows that the face goes up on the shelf and who knows how to turn on the boiler using the you know funny switch in the back is what you want and that a big full turducken of change in and reorienting the entire capitalist system may be more than people are on for. And I would also argue that was one of the lessons of the Affordable Care Act is that the president talked about a lot of different tried to sell in a lot of different ways. But people liked the idea of helping those without health insurance. But when it came to potentially hurting what they had they changed their political views. And so the just offering people another big dose of change may not be what people are on for I color me super skeptical of that.


S4: I I think a number of the Democratic candidates would come in and run very tight ship administrations that would restore a lot of the order and would put really smart capable institutional people in place.


S5: I think Warren is doing again. I think that he’s saying that people’s impression of big structural change may be like oh wait a second can we just like go back to all.


S6: Thank you Emily. Yeah.


S8: Thank you. I always have to be on the watch for when I try to speak in someone else’s voice that I end up being the advocate of that argument.


S4: All right. Last last question on this. Emily to you so let let us for the sake of argument assume that Warren is the front runner. What should a non-aligned Democrat a Democrat who really just wants to defeat Trump. What should that non-aligned Democrat wish Warren to be doing in the next few months in what kind of testing should one wish her to have.


S15: The important thing is to continue to seem like she’s not standing for the status quo despite what John just said.


S5: She is someone who is going to take seriously the concerns of the American people about how government works. And she’s going to fix things. And I think she has positioned herself effectively as that person. Now I would like her to stick to the popular proposals from Democrats that would have great impact like Medicare for all who want it to begin with and move away from the things that are more are just less popular like do they stand for the things that you could actually accomplish that are not going to frighten voters away and continue to present yourself as like a beacon for change which it seems to me pretty clear that she would be Slate Plus members get bonus segments on the gab fest other Slate podcasts just 35 dollars a year for your first year.


S4: Slate accomplished gab fest plus to become a member today and let us discuss in Slate Plus did a succession the TV show succession the politics of succession what you can learn from succession. Great show will be fun discussion so go to Slate dot com slash gabfest plus become a member.


S1: Today so it’s usually enough to have one representative of Yale Law School on the gab fest but this week this week you get. We’ve got a second one. We’re joined by Daniel Markovich who’s a Yale University Law School professor.


S10: Unlike Emily who’s merely a kind of instructor or adjunct or so good of you to make that clear and it’s all true and correct. I think you have the higher rank though in his my right.


S1: Well both of you. Both of you clearly have qualify in Daniel’s new book as being members of the meritocracy. His new book is The meritocracy trap how America’s foundational myth feeds inequality dismantles the middle class and devours the elite. Daniel don’t devour us. Welcome to the gabfest.


S16: Thank you for having me. It’s a real pleasure to be here.


S17: So I get to ask the first question you’ve written this book which is an attack on the meritocracy and of and really a kind of create occur about its grave injustices and the ways in which it is hurting people even as it tries to help them. So are you calling for a system that could be made more fair or do you think we have to just blow up the whole thing is it unsalvageable.


S16: I think what we have to do is focus on the distinction between what maybe we can call excellence on the one hand and superiority on the other. Excellence is skill. Doing something well that’s worth doing. And superiority is being better than other people at things whether they’re worth doing or not. And we have a kind of competitive meritocracy in which superiority is what counts getting better grades working longer hours being more highly paid or more productive jobs that are maybe not very socially useful rather than one where excellence is what counts. That is to say figuring out what’s worth doing and then give people the training that they need to do it well and create the job opportunities for them to do it in actually before we get further.


S1: Daniel I. Emily unlike a lot of our listeners has has read your book but you should explain to two gabfest listeners what is the meritocracy trap. What is exactly is happening that is so dangerous.


S16: Yeah good. It seems like it’s just common sense that people should get ahead based on their own accomplishments rather than say their parents social class. But what’s happened as a result of a system in which people get ahead based on their own accomplishments is that certain people in particular rich people invest enormous amounts of money in training their children and buying educations for their children that nobody else can afford. And so then rich kids get ahead whereas everybody else can’t keep up. And at the same time because you get ahead based on your own accomplishments once you have this fancy education the only way to get income out of it is constantly to work yourself at jobs that you may not choose but that are very high paying. And so even the elite gets kind of exploited by this system. So what the system does is it excludes everybody else who can’t keep up with the training that rich families buy for their children and then it requires the elite to work in a kind of a sort of unending pitiless competition and nobody thrives. That’s the devouring part that’s the devouring part OK.


S17: So then you want to replace that system with one that values excellence instead of superiority. And that sounds great. But how does it translate into the real world of college admissions or people getting chosen for certain jobs. Is there a way that we can widen the pool or think differently about how we evaluate people that avoids ranking that avoids excluding some people and not other people especially when we’re talking about selective college admissions.


S16: Right. Sure. So let’s take a field we both know well law and let’s compare American lot of German law. So here are two big differences between American law and German law. One big difference is that Germany has no really no private law schools it has one now there’s no elite law schools all the law schools are the same as each other. It has no private universities it has no private schools. What it has is a state system in which each institution is really pretty good and none is totally great. And so it trains large numbers of excellent lawyers but no really superior lawyers who get anything like what the training is given by Stanford or Harvard or Yale. So that’s on the school side if you look on the law side German law is structured in such a way that the difference between a competent lawyer and a superstar lawyer for the client is almost zero. And that has to do with the way in which the German legal system is built and we can talk about the details if you want but that doesn’t matter. What matters is that you have a system in which once you’re competent you can do everything for your client that your client needs being superstar does very little good. And the education system trains competent but not superstar lawyers. You have much more equality in the system and the legal system in Germany provides justice much more cheaply and much more accurately than ours does. So there is a concrete case in which what you have is excellence but not superiority.


S18: Daniela was there a period in American in American history where people where where we did figure out what was worth doing and then train people to do that. And is it remotely possible that we could ever get back to such a time because it seems like it would require collective action of a kind that we can’t do you know get together it even tie or shoe laces.


S16: Well the second part of your question applies to almost any policy reform that might improve matters. And I think actually the kind of inequality that we have and the role of meritocracy in producing it is part of the reason why we can’t get ourselves together to collective action. But on the first part of your question the period between the end of the Second World War and 1975 or so is a period in which the country massively increased the share of its population who went to college massively opened up college to groups that in previously excluded working and middle class people women and people of color massively improve the quality of college education without making it much more exclusive in fact while making it less exclusive and supplemented college with an elaborate system of workplace training that meant that even people who didn’t go to college could get systematic training on the job that would enable them to advance and to end up doing jobs that paid well and gave them substantial independence and dignity at work. So that was a period of real economic justice from the middle to the top of the income distribution. It was also a period of a lot of poverty which is a separate issue and we’re focusing on and it’s worth not ignoring that there was a lot of poverty then. But once you were out of poverty life was pretty good in America. Between 1950 and 1975.


S1: Given what you’ve just described there Daniel it occurs to me that if I were thinking about the major public policy responses I would not necessarily focus on the elite institutions which are after all private. I think the chances that you can get the U.S. government to force them to change their structure to force them to disgorge there and get down ments or force them to increase their class size by 100 percent. That seems like a real longshot but where there’s been huge degradation is in the public higher education system and public secondary education too. But public higher education which has been significantly defunded relative to GDP relative to state government budgets over the past generation and that if you want to increase the number of people who have excellence and not superiority it seems to me like that that making Penn State more affordable making the Cal university system as good as it was 40 years ago relative to overall universities. That seems to me the best way you could spend money. Yet I feel like you’re focusing more on the elite institutions than on the public institutions.


S19: Well I’m not against doing those things funding up those institutions but I think the focus on private institutions is important for two reasons. One is a political reason or the other is a policy reason. The political reason is that the grounds that the cause of the defunding of the state institutions is that the elites having been trained up in this way and now working all the time believe that they deserve their advantage and because they believe they deserve their advantage. They’re much less inclined politically to be willing to pay taxes to fund non elites in their own educations. And so until you break the elite grip on advantage and on the idea of desert the politics of redistribution is to be very hard on the policy front. If you focus not just on the Ivy League but on all private institutions doubling enrollments in these institutions would immediately increase the expenditure per student in state institutions which could now survive with fewer students teaching them more intensively first of all and second of all. Politically I think it is possible to do you know the Trump tax reform for the first time putting endowment tax on the richest universities.


S20: These universities are so wealthy that the status quo cannot endure. If American university endowments keep growing at the same pace they’ve been growing out for the past 30 years and household wealth keeps growing at the same pace it’s been growing out for the past 30 years. Sometime around 20 150 20 160 something like that the 10 richest universities in America will own the entire country. That’s not going to happen. And they can be made to understand that it’s not going to happen. And so what they need to do is start spending more of their endowment on educating students and they need to start educating a much broader array of students not just rich kids. I think that’s politically feasible in the current environment and I think even university leadership if it sees what’s going to happen to it if it doesn’t agree to this kind of reform can be made to buy in so you have such good answers I think for the systemic problems that we’re seeing.


S17: They’re also not achievable immediately or at least they’re hard to achieve now. Maybe the answer for that is that we need to start making them a real part of the political agenda in this country. And I don’t think it’s a coincidence that the period of time you know from 50 to 75 or maybe 48 to 80 that there was the most equality is also the time that Elizabeth Warren and her Canarsie kind of harks back to as a better deal for Americans. So do you see operationalizing your ideas as a matter of like pushing the Elizabeth Warren campaign to think more about how it addresses private institutions or are we supposed to be doing things individually ourselves in the meantime. You and I are leading for you. This kind of unacceptable life of teaching these elite students at an elite school do we just like keep going. And what what’s the answer.


S19: Yeah I mean on the second point you know none of us is innocent and none of us is pure. And people do the things they do for a thousand reasons. In all walks of life if we got what we deserve none of us would escape whipping. And that’s I mean that seriously. So in that sense we’re all complicit and we’re guilty at the same time. Your question points out correctly that an effective change has to be systemic rather than individual and you start seeing in the Democratic Party in Elizabeth Warren’s campaign I actually think Pete Bridge has some parts of his campaign that see this Bernie Sanders sees this but at the moment too much of the political energy is still focused on identifying villains. This connects back to the first thing I said and I’m trying to find places at which elites are in one way or another cheating to stay ahead and damage everyone else. And while it’s true that there is a lot of elite cheating there’s rent seeking there’s fraud there’s self dealing there are all sorts of forms of misconduct. If I’m right that the biggest part of the inequality that we see comes from structural forces and from the rules themselves and in particular from the meritocratic aspect of the rules then the policies that will be needed to undo it are very different from tightening up anti fraud laws trying to produce a fairer competition to get into elite institutions and they’re gonna have to look in a way that that actually dismantles the elite the liberal response to this kind of inequality is to hitch your wagon to equality of opportunity and to say if we can just have the right mechanism for sorting people we can make inequality of outcomes OK because there’s equality of opportunity. And the lesson of the book in a sentence is that when inequalities of outcome get big enough equality of opportunity is impossible. And so you have to go after the outcomes directly.


S18: Daniel what stories do we tell each other. Going all the way back maybe even some of the stories that came out of that golden period before 1975 that because when you were describing that you’re talking about reframing a way of looking at something to make sure that the diagnosis is correct said that the prescription can be effective. So one of the stories that are told about America and American you know whether it’s Horatio Alger or anything else that that that locks into the wrong worldview and therefore therefore the wrong diagnosis and is there a better story that America should tell itself.


S19: I mean I think that the key story is one of social mobility which of course the data suggests we don’t have compared to other rich countries. Social mobility in this country is maybe a third what it is in a country like Denmark and also the idea that people who work hard and are incredibly productive deserve to get paid a lot.


S20: So that if one wants to argue that someone shouldn’t get paid as much as she gets paid that a CEO who gets paid more than she should be paid then has to argue that somehow they’re not being productive and one has to undermine the idea that they’re hardworking and productive people whereas I think a better account is there are all kinds of skills in the world that are incredibly productive in our world. But the only reason they’re so productive is that our world is very unequal. So if you want to a concrete example I have a friend who was once in a field with her she was throwing a boomerang and there was another guy with us who was a socio biologist and he looked at her and he said in a society of hunter gatherers you would be a gatherer and the reason he said that is that it was terrible throwing boomerangs. It in our society she has a set of skills that makes her an incredibly highly paid incredibly high status person.


S19: But those skills are valuable only because we lead lives in a very unequal society. She has the ability to hedge risks. She has the ability to manage lots of other people. If we are an equal society those skills wouldn’t be so valuable. And so the point is it’s not true that she’s committing fraud to get her high pay but it is true that she doesn’t deserve her pay because the structure that makes her productive is a structure we should reject which is a hierarchical and unequal structure. I think that’s an argument that’s important to try to drive home as much as possible.


S1: Daniel actually can you talk for a second. And I’m not sure if you addressed this in the book or not about CEO pay which is a kind of for me a paradigmatic example of of where this has gone so cockeyed where whereby CEOs now get these enormous multiples of what average workers get and in part they get it because they’re measured against that that way. Compensation committees structure are structured at most big companies as you look at what comparable CEOs are paid. And then you have to pay your CEO to match that and therefore it’s a constant escalator up because one person gets a little bit more. And so now that the bar that matches needs to be higher and and yet all these people are replaceable you could bring in somebody who is a vice president who is making a tenth of what the CEO is doing and that person would do a pretty good job. Would do 90 percent as good a job and and maybe 98 percent as good a job but yet that that compensation keeps going up and up.


S20: Yeah let me. That’s a great example because I have a slightly different view actually about the CEO pay. I think it illustrates very well the difference in the kind of view I’m arguing in a more traditional left view. So the traditional view is exactly when you give which is the CEOs are are overpaid in the technical sense that they’re paid more than they’re worth and that the reason they’re overpaid is they control compensation committees and effectively set their own salary. There’s a problem with that view which is that when private equity firms take companies private CEO pay does not go down and the people who run private equity firms are not altruists. They don’t pay a penny more than it’s worth it to them to pay. And that suggests that they believe that the CEO is in fact worth more than she is being paid. So how could that be possible. Well the story the book tells is that management has been fundamentally restructured in American corporations. Fifty years ago management was dispersed across all of a company’s employees. There were layers and layers of middle managers and even line production workers were in effect managers because they were lifetime employees and they were charged as it were with managing their own human capital and skills for the good of the firm. And when the management function is dispersed across the firm what that means is that all of the workers get a share of the economic returns to management and everybody gets paid more because everyone’s partly a manager. And the super manager at the top is not that valuable to the firm because on the one hand the firm will run itself without him. And on the other hand he can’t shift the firm very much because there are all these other managers who are controlling it in his place from about 1980 onwards. The management function has been stripped from everybody except elite executives who now run the firm effectively like a dictatorship. And that means that they capture all the returns to management and also that if they’re good managers they’re incredibly valuable. So there’s a sense in which their returns are matched by their value to the firm. Now I can talk about why that happened and how that happened. But the important thing to see is we don’t need a story about CEO fraud or rent seeking to explain why the old view when management is spread across the firm. Employees are better paid employees have more control over their work in their firm is a better fairer way of running things than the current system. And that’s the kind of argument that I think is really important to understand that pattern has happened all across the economy. And that’s the pattern that needs to be unwound.


S18: In politics we’ve had the same thing. Basically everything used to have dispersed management throughout all branch through at least Congress and the presidency and now it basically all just goes to the presidency except the way they define the job. You can’t be a good manager but so. So how did that happen real quickly and then the second thing is just to hit on another point. You’ve said before but it seems like what you’re saying is we don’t need to demonize the people who have succeeded in this particular structure in the moment. They’re not necessarily bad people which is the way stuff gets framed in politics of the moment. It’s that a structure exists and then in fact to demonize them is to stay blind to the larger structural shift that you’re talking about making.


S19: So the second point is really important which is that when you demonize the people at the top it’s not just that you blame the people at the top which may be deserving in some in some cases it’s also that you disguise you close your eyes to the structure. And if I’m right that the structure is much more important than the wrongdoing you then close your eyes to what’s really important. Now how did this happen in management. Well there were two kinds of developments. One development was elite education an elite business school education really got going and created a new class of managerial workers. The managers at mid century were largely lazy and not particularly well educated and they couldn’t do what say Jamie Diamond does at at JP Morgan today. They also wouldn’t of been willing to work the hours that the managers are willing to work today. So you created a class of labor that could run the firm in this way. And then at the same time a series of managerial technologies were invented that gave stockholders and others an incentive to replace the old style of management with the new style. So the market for corporate control which was invented by elite lawyers the leveraged buyout which was invented by elite lawyers made it possible for shareholders to give incentives to elite managers and make them into profit drivers for the firm but not possible for them to incentivize any other workers. So suddenly there was a big incentive for owners to come in kick out old managers put in place new managers who wanted to manage on the new style who were then eliminate middle management from the firm management consultants had a big role to play in this too. If you look at the sort of internal history of McKinsey and BCG you can see that they sold this style of management. And of course the attack on unions had a big part to play in this because the union was basically a way of making production workers into management. And that was very important for union wages. So all those things happened and transformed the management of the firm to get what we have now to move from an update from an equal to an unequal structure. And again we could tell the same story in retail we could tell the same story manufacturing. We could tell the same story in finance. This is true pervasively across the economy. And that’s the biggest driver of inequality today.


S4: Go get the meritocracy Trap How America’s foundational myth feeds inequality dismantle the middle class and devours the elite by Daniel Markowitz and then feel really bad about your place in the meritocracy.


S12: If you have a place in meritocracy no and then feel armed to address it right. That’s what I meant no harm to address it. RFE RL.


S16: Now we address people Well well thank you in either in either case and I would say then feel like you see things the way they actually are.


S10: Thanks very much. There we go. That’s the Rada. Thank you so much for coming. Thank you. I’m really grateful. Thanks a lot Daniel.


S13: Let’s go to cocktail chatter when you. Emily Bazelon Ah in a elegant new haven pub the thought that you only have a new haven the bright lights of New Haven with your beautiful wood wooden pubs.


S10: What will you be chattering about. I don’t even know what I’m planning. This just. I just started and didn’t to finish it.


S5: We do have excellent health here. I am so struck this week by a story in The New York Times about the state of Ohio and its efforts to purge 235 voters. Even though 40000 of those people were on this list as false positives. In other words they should not have been on the list so to back up a step last year. I feel like I talked a lot on the god fest about a Supreme Court decision 5 to 4 that allowed for this purge to take place. Basically Ohio wants to kick people off the voting rolls if they haven’t voted in six years and they don’t respond to one postcard from the state saying hey you need to go renew your voter registration. That’s not a whole lot of notice. It looked really questionable about whether it was in line with federal law. The Supreme Court said no worries Ohio go ahead.


S14: The state puts this list together apparently doesn’t itself do a whole lot of checking for false positives but does take one positive step which is to release the list so that voting groups could start checking it and then some volunteers including this one guy Steve Dingley Haq who runs a watchdog group out of his lake house with almost no money.


S11: It’s called the Ohio Voter Project. He seems to personally have been responsible for finding thousands of people who are on these voter rolls even though they had voted very recently. This is just crazy like it just suggests that the state is much more prone to kicking people off the rolls than to worrying about disenfranchising disenfranchising people and I guess the larger point I want to make about this is that purges of voter rolls are so important to watch out for they’ve been shown to have a greater impact on participation in voting than voter I.D. laws but they’ve gotten much less attention. And what Ohio is doing. Other states are starting to talk about or actually do this as well. States like Florida in the past have accidentally or wrongly purged thousands of people and those states have not opened up their purge list for groups to double check. So I you know I think what we’re seeing here is like one more effort of disenfranchisement and then to realize how many people are getting kicked off the rolls without cause is really amazing.


S21: John Dickerson what’s your chatter. My chatter is about I think this is how you pronounce his name.


S7: L.A. keep Shoji and he broke the record for a two hour marathon so that’s twenty six point two miles in an average pace of four minutes and thirty five seconds a mile.


S8: It’s unbelievable. And so this is basically I think the equivalent or maybe even more than an equivalent of Roger Bannister is breaking the four minute mile. But when what fascinated me about it is all of the science and work that had to go into pulling off this epic achievement I mean first of all obviously he has a physical body and training regimen that is that is exceptional. But since June the various people working on this project have been in Vienna which they picked because of its weather and its flat topography. But they then worked on it for you know there were. I think they came up with 15 different routes that he might possibly go depending on the weather. They had these runners go along with him who were setting his pace but also then they were in kind of an inverted inverted V so that they would break the wind and then water was delivered to him on bicycle which apparently is for some reason. It puts an asterisk by his achievement because somehow for it to be fully amazing he would have had to have gone to go get the water himself from like a little table on the side of the route. But anyway it’s just this amazing achievement has been accomplished and Wired has a good piece about it and there are few other really good articles about it and how it was how it was done and all of the people who worked on it. You should go check him out.


S5: Can I just add that Kenya’s Brigid Kosky from saying her name correctly also shattered the women’s marathon world record by more than a minute last weekend by winning the Chicago.


S4: And yes there is. I strongly recommend there’s a great hang up and listen segment about both of the these incredible achievements. I would note that Kip choking is not a world record though because it was done with all these artificial benefits. It is not and does not in any sense diminish the extraordinary extraordinary achievement of it but it doesn’t count officially whereas the women’s record was smashed and in a spectacular fashion the hang up and listen segment is really really great. If you get a chance to listen my chatter is about a story I saw on the American Prospect by Amanda Frost who is a law professor at American University and it’s about the war on naturalized citizens. So among the many abominations that Stephen Miller and the president are committing towards immigrants and legal immigrants we now add an attack on people who were once immigrants who have now become Americans. The administration is now spending two hundred million dollars. They’ve hired 300 agents to investigate people who are naturalized and to open up 700000 cases. The case of seven hundred thousand people who’ve been naturalized in recent years to seeks to search for errors or other reasons why they might not have been naturalized and in a perfectly i’s dotted t’s crossed way so that they can d naturalized them. Turns out there’s no statute of limitation on naturalize in someone so someone may have been naturalized decades ago. And the administration now plans to go after them and try to D naturalized them by the thousands to get a sense of what the scale of this is normally like in a typical year. Over the past 20 years we have d naturalized 11 people a year and now they want to do this to thousands and thousands and thousands and thousands of people. And it’s almost always for something. It’s not that it’s not that these people were you know hadn’t done something wrong in the process of being naturalized some of them entered the United States under a false name or they got you know there is something that they did at some point in the process but had gone through a naturalization process and that had all been cleared and accepted and now the Trump administration wants to go out and root out mistakes that were made in the process and drive these people out of the country where they’ve made a home. It’s absolutely disgusting and wrong and brings terror to people who have made themselves American and it’s disgusting. It’s absolutely disgusting anyway. Amanda Frost’s piece in The American Prospect listeners you have been sending us great chatters this week as an every week you’ve been tweeting them to us at Slate gabfest and this week from at spoke smoko or Socko Socko not sure how you pronounce that spoke with spoke or spoken polka spoke of smoko refers us to another podcast which is reply all which is a wonderful wonderful podcast did an episode about feral hogs and it came out of the there was a of Twitter feed for some months ago about feral hogs and people talking about feral hogs overrunning their garden and reply all went and dug into what the deal with feral hogs in rural America and spoke I spoke to says it’s a crazy amazing story and it’s and I’m going to go listen to it right after the show. My next that will be my next podcast. That’s our show for today.


S3: The episode is produced by Joslyn Frank. Joplin is with me here in Washington which is so nice Joplin now waving at me from outside the studio and a researcher is Brigitte Dunlap who is not with me here in Washington but she’s in Chicago somewhere I think. Hi Brigitte. Melissa Kaplan helped engineer here in D.C. Ryan McAvoy I assume helped you in New Haven and Alan Pang helped John in New York. You should follow us on Twitter at like at best we chat to us and please come to our conundrum live show in Oakland California on Wednesday December 18th go to Slate dot com flashlight for tickets to that and also please tweet conundrums to us at Slate gab fest using hashtag conundrum or go to Slate dot com slash conundrum to give us a conundrum.


S22: There are for Emily Bazelon and John Dickerson and David Plotz. Thanks for listening. We will talk to you next week.


S4: Hello Slate Plus Slate Plus I know you you spent Sunday evening watching the succession finale or maybe you watched on Monday because you are busy on Sunday night but you made sure to watch it.


S5: Can we just say big SPOILER ALERT right. Yeah I’ll turn this off if you have not watched the finale and don’t want to happen.


S4: Oh and before we get to play plus I should mention that Jon had to step away to go finalize his for 60 Minutes piece. So it’s just gonna be me and Emily and Slate Plus today. So if you watched succession you almost certainly have watched the finale because it was too exciting to hold back. So you’ve probably watched it by now if you were a succession watcher and if you don’t watch succession you probably don’t care if you’re probably not listening anyway but if you are a succession watcher who somehow has not seen it definitely turn this off because we’re going to spoil the hell out of it just save it. Yeah and listen to us later or listen to other Slate podcasts about succession. There’s


S10: a great succession we already know they should listen to us.


S4: Okay listen that’s fine whatever. So Emily totally addicting show really fun to watch. It has been one of the high points of my my late summer and fall has been watching succession. Why why did you Why are you so excited for us to talk about it. What does it have to do with what we know about it and what we’re expert in.


S15: Well honestly I’ve had this weird feeling since this show started but especially this season that there is some cosmic connection between all the things going wrong in American politics and media and all the things going wrong on this show. So I have some feeling that maybe now it’s over like the disorder and chaos will. It’s like a fever will break in America though obviously this week is like the opposite of that. So I have the opposite of evidence for my notion. I think there is a many many like surface level ways in which the show is telling us something about Rupert Murdoch’s media empire and about you know kind of elite control over American viewing habits and who’s behind them and the kind of lack of principle. It feels real to me whether exactly it is or not. And then you know you have these moments like this week in which there was news that one of the Murdochs bought an interest in Vice Media which was an idea that that succession had spoofed earlier in the season and it really does feel like reality imitating art.


S4: Yeah I think those are really good points. The world in succession is a world without love or kindness or trust there’s only cruelty there’s only betrayal. There’s only narcissism. No but no one there’s no joy in anything. No one ever has sex. No one ever eats anything with pleasure. No one takes pleasure in anything it is it is it is a purely it’s the world of all against all. It’s like the of the Hobbesian Hobbesian state of nature right.


S15: They feel momentary glee at humiliating and mocking each other.


S4: Right. And that is that is extremely evocative of how you imagine Trump lives. And it has elements of how the world is what the world is like today. And it’s and it’s interesting to kind of see this picture of what what is it like to live in a world without love or kindness or trust and it is in no sense the world that I want to live in. It’s no sense the world that I feel I do live in. And but I don’t know why that’s so why is it so pleasurable to watch people be so cruel and so here’s my theory about this because I normally hate any kind of entertainment in which there’s no one to love or root for.


S11: I think there’s something liberating in this show about how there is no one whose fate you care a great deal about. And so I feel so little emotional investment in what is going to happen to the characters. Normally that’s a bad thing. But I think first of all in this political moment it’s kind of a relief to just feel like you’re watching people and not having some deep sense of like Oh my God something terrible is happening. And the second thing is it’s very funny. I mean it is just mordant Leigh funny and the dialogue is written in this like way over the top cleverness set of lines that just like gives you like you have to pay attention the whole time just for those moments and I think that also has a kind of delectable quality to it.


S4: Right. Well so it comes out of that this is sort of family tree of in in the loop. This British show Armando Iannucci show and then I think veep spins off of that. I believe I am right when I said that the succession should show runner Jesse Armstrong comes out of that universe.


S5: So it also is an Adam McKay production to writer reminds me a little bit of his of the big short.


S4: Right. But but these this each of these has gotten successively more and more and more vicious and dark. I mean it’s not unlike it is not unlike the world of Veep but it is much darker and less. I mean it’s funny.


S12: It says you’re not sick. You’re right. So it has like that additional layer.


S4: One of the things I think that’s quite brilliant about it and I don’t know how to I don’t know why it does this is that it produces archetypes really well that you start to think of people as oh that person to share that person’s aroma that person to Kendall that person is a corner that that although you really don’t want to meet any of those people in real life except maybe Greg and not even cousin Greg.


S10: Yeah yeah no.


S15: I mean he is my favorite character partly just because he’s such a shambolic mess but also because if there is any sense of not morality but just like reality check on the show it comes from him in the most bumbling way and a little bit from Schiff’s husband Tom right. And to me now to talk about the finale before we talk about the larger actual succession drama of the finale to me the most interesting and moving even scene I don’t know moving is the wrong word.


S11: But I’m still thinking about it is the scene between Tom and Shep about their marriage in which you do see shifts have some misgivings about the degree to which she has just been like shoving various daggers between Tom’s ribs and some sense that there is a limit whether it’s just that she doesn’t want her new husband to walk out the door several months presumably into their marriage or that she feels some emotional remorse.


S15: He actually like succeeds in embarrassing her. And finally you feel some sense of the tables turning between them which I found very satisfying hmm mm hmm.


S4: No I mean slightly satisfying but who cares. I mean they’re terrible people. He’s Thomas an appalling person.


S14: He’s slightly less appalling but I still want cup for himself.


S5: I mean he’s totally appalling. But I was like tired of her just sort of brutal dominance game.


S4: Mm hmm. I didn’t care. Why would I care. Why would I care that their marriage be restored or that that he stopped being humiliated.


S15: Yeah I don’t I don’t care about their marriage being restored. I wanted her to be taken down a peg I think because I was tired of and also like one thing I have trouble understanding is why she married him in the first place. He seems like not an asset and she seems like someone who’d be out there hunting for an asset. So then my theory was like OK well actually she loves being so dominant and having him to kick around and gets off on that and like that’s what’s explaining this relationship.


S5: And so I liked the idea that in some way he was saying like there is a limit here and that she actually went to bat for him with her all powerful malevolent father.


S21: Yeah.


S4: One of the things that I find weird about the show or compelling about it is it invents new forms awfulness that I didn’t even know existed. So there are all these different ways that people are terrible to each other. And I I honestly didn’t recognize it. So they visit some point during the season they visit their British mother the children visit their British mother who’s this undermine or of the highest order. Or just. Just. She’s actually worse than their terrible father. And it seemed impossible seemed impossible. Who knew how her ability to make her children feel terrible was so profound. That was a whole new form of awfulness that I just didn’t even see coming.


S15: Well and she displays it. Kendall wants to confide in her something that’s eating away at him and she refuses to talk to him.


S13: Right. Right.


S15: It’s chilly. British social mores taken to some like incredibly frightening extreme.


S11: Yeah. You know here’s another theme of the show that resonates with me right now is the struggle with lack of accountability. So there is very little accountability for all kinds of wrongdoing on this show. You know this like incredible set of payoffs for sexual harassment and rape and like death that’s gone on in their cruise business. And then there’s also Kendall the older son his lack of accountability for the death of a waiter at ship’s wedding who died when their car went off the road.


S15: And I it’s so you see people getting away with murder effectively. Kendall in murder that guy but like there’s just some feeling that you can get away with anything if you’re this wealthy and then there are these small moments where Kendall seems to actually feel guilty and shame and the father is like amazing at feeling none of those emotions which is such a great strength of his. I find watching all that right now like watching people work that out on television again to be a kind of useful alternative lens for thinking about our era and RPI no real person involved.


S5: Yes exactly. No real person involved because who knows if people really are people.


S23: All right. That’s it Slate Plus go watch succession if you haven’t. So good bye by.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your slate plus membership.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for December 26 twenty nineteen. The Oakland conundrum addition.


S3: We were looking out we’re looking out at an audience that seems progressive but not unrealistically unrealistically progressive, an audience filled with people who work in technology but not in the broe, a terrible technology.


S4: They work in social justice, but not in the commie kind of social justice. And they are people who are definitely, wilda, willing to build some housing, but not willing to sell the whole city out for developers. In short, we’re in Oakland, California.


S5: Gabfests is live at the Fox Theater in the heart of downtown Oakland.


S6: There may be no there there, but there are a lot of you here. I’m David Plotz of Atlas Obscura. On my left is Emily Bazelon, of course.


S7: Just as just as Reggie Jackson, Reggie Jackson made his name with the Oakland A’s, then went on to legendary fame in New York with the Yankees. So Emily Bazelon made her bones as a dogged reporter for the Tri Valley Herald covering San Ramone spent the whole time wishing I was working for the Tribune and has now gone to great fame in New York City. And on her left. A man who is a walking conundrum himself. How can anyone be so smart and so kind and so handsome? John DICKERSON of CBS 60 Minutes.


S8: You mean you’ve forgotten humble?


S9: On this special edition of The Gab Fest. We’re going to tackle some of the world’s most pressing conundrums. We’re not personal conundrum. So would you rather be exceptional at one thing, but awful at everything else or just pretty good at everything? And we’ll have social and political conundrums such as would you prefer to have Donald Trump as your president or as your father?


S10: And later, we’ll be joined by a special guest, you know him for Mythbusters, Adam Savage.


S11: And then we will tackle conundrums from this very audience for our own special Slate Plus segment. So let us get started. You have to swap places with the main character from any book. Who do you swap with?


S12: Start. No, no, I want you to start. OK. So just think how much better Hamlet would have gone if Ophelia had a sunny disposition.


S13: It’s kind of like got that together, rolled with the punches, decided to have a response, and didn’t turn into a wave of really depressed away for then floated away. It wasn’t.


S14: Which character would you like to give Prozac?


S15: I want to swap and then fix things.


S16: Wait. But did you want to hang out with that? He’s so moody. You’re like when you’re when he’s. I’m gonna fix this. I’m gonna fix it. Yeah. Yeah, he’s gonna be different. I’m totally the victim.


S17: I love this question of the challenge. Like which story would it really help to fix this story?


S15: And I really feel like I could inhabit Ophelia and make it come out better. I’m so much more reasonable and kind of balance than she is. I don’t want to be the failure in the book. And then I was thinking about Lady Macbeth, her character.


S14: You could really good things would be so much better if these you could do laundry, whether at the play.


S16: It might not be, but damn spot. Would that be a good play if at the end, you know, he’s just like, oh yeah, let’s get married on the premise of the question like which. Real serious.


S18: Just like if we get to hijack the premise of the question I’m going to approach this evening differently. John, would you switch places? Oh, no, wait. You do say switch places with her. Hang out with swap. You get oh, you get to be the main character. Oh. Oh. Because I because hang out with.


S19: Would be Ford Prefect because now he always knew where his towel was. Two people got that reference.


S14: No Nick, I would. I would like to be Nick Charles in the Thin Man because he could disarm a man of his revolver and never spill his martini.


S20: That’s good. That’s good.


S21: David, I think well, I’ve always had a crush on Lizzie Bennet from Pride and Prejudice. So I think I would like to be Mr. Darcy cause I would be rich and have a great deal and the girl pemberley. And then I get to end up with Lizzie Bennet, which would be awesome.


S12: All right. That’s a good one. Although I do feel like in the end, of course, you’re going to pick someone who has superpowers. Right. I mean, you are the most honest in that you wouldn’t really want to be like Lyra in his dark materials or Princess Leia. I know that’s not a book or her Miney Granger or whatever. A great character from Lord of the Rings, which is always your go to. Of course you would if you could do magic. Wouldn’t you want to go do magic?


S13: I don’t think so. No, really. I totally would.


S14: I’d rather be. I would want to be Aragorn. Who can’t do it.


S22: Really? He could do. Please. Can you not? Can you just not do any Lord of the Rings night?


S13: I open the door. I’m sorry. She brought it up. I didn’t bring it up. I didn’t. You asked me that.


S12: I didn’t even. It’s not even mentioned of the dragon.


S21: Maybe you could be the tenant. No. Maha eggnog. That’s how I feel right now. All right. Emily, do you give us another room?


S12: OK. If you could mind meld with your pet for just one question. Answer. What would the question be? Note we are stealing this from Clara Jefferys, Twitter Quest. Could Twitter feed because it’s too good to pass up as a conundrum? Thank you, Clara.


S23: Well, the obvious question for the dog would be who’s a good boy?


S21: I saw I have a couple of cats and one of the cats really likes to eat earwax. And so I would like to ask the cat. What’s up with that? Why are you eating earwax? What are you. What’s so good? They would just say that it tastes good to them.


S17: What else would they offer you?


S24: What would you ask your pet? You don’t have a pet.


S25: I don’t have a pet. I used to have a dog and my dog. Hey, he made me feel that being left alone was like a betrayal and tragedy. So I want to ask him, like, could you be left alone?


S13: Is there any time of day point at which it’s OK to leave you alone in the house?


S12: Maybe it’s not so bad.


S19: Maybe once I’m gone, the howling stops, which is also true with parenting.


S26: Which animal? If it could speak and you could talk to, it would be most annoying.


S27: I mean, the birds that have really little voices like the tweet this.


S28: I don’t want to talk to those birds. How do you think?


S14: I hate to sound annoying or actually be annoying, but I feel like both.


S17: Both quality. Huh.


S14: You know, Teddy Roosevelt had a super high voice, although he might have actually been annoying, too. But I guess my where I started with that sentence was started with that sentence was the hyena’s of the voice isn’t necessarily proof of an inner annoying as. But then I realized I couldn’t really follow it all the way through with Rose.


S29: I think dogs would be so annoying if because they’d be like, Are you mad at me or are you mad? Are you are you know you’re mad at me? Are you? Are you are you mad at me? See, this is. Are you are you mad?


S28: This is a new boyfriend. Don’t worry. I’m here. I’m here. I love you.


S14: You guys you guys have such a jaundiced view. The dog would be like. I love you. I love you, a_v_i_.


S21: That would be unbearable, though.


S14: It would be a no no because it would always be sincere. It would each time it would come with the fresh propulsion of sincerity.


S30: There are some dog lovers in the audience.


S22: What? What would you ask? What do you think?


S14: Would Meitner and I mean, this is such a boring answer, but hyena’s obviously because they would be laughing all the time.


S31: They’d be laughing at the jokes. Wouldn’t be funny. They would be would be nervous.


S14: Laughter. It would make every situation unsettling.


S24: Remember, we used to have a colleague who had that laugh. It would be like that.


S14: Oh, my God. It was like a report from a cannon. You’d be trying to do your work in this. Laugh would emerge. And the end. It was really destabilizing. That would be the hyena. David, resurrection or reincarnation? Not what do you not what do you believe? But which would you prefer? I feel like I was as I asked this question in a previous life.


S21: So. So, okay.


S22: The advantage of the advantage of resurrection is, you know, you get to come back as a person. You’re pretty clear. You got to come back. You got to come back as yourself.


S32: And you know what that is. On the other hand, it would be so boring to live your life over and over and over and over again and front time.


S33: Maybe it’s not living it over, but you know, you’re yourself. Is it like Groundhog Day? Really? Oh, no.


S34: Here I am again, running the same mistakes. I like the same said re-incarnation gave each talk print.


S35: I think reincarnation would be so fun. Gives you would you would get one of these different experiences. Be great to be a cockroach for me. You would only be 14 days.


S34: I guess I could trade up getting to be reincarnated because then I definitely want to be right. Oh, I assume you keep getting to do it. Yeah.


S27: Then I mean both that you get more bites at the apple, so to speak, but also that you get to take on all these different forms.


S23: John, I’m very. This is again, very conflicted here.


S36: Your church has a good history saying as the good. Well yeah but but man what you gotta go through.


S37: And then and then no one believes you.


S38: But then people worship you for a really long time. Yes. Well, that does di that is appealing.


S39: Well, it all depends on whether you know it or not. Right. Because because I may have already made the decision, but I don’t think that.


S40: But that doesn’t tell us what you would prefer. Well, but I don’t know. I was trying to go throw the metaphysical long ball there. Don’t. I don’t know.


S41: I guess reincarnation. All right. I actually meant resurrection.


S42: I got so flustered, I think.


S43: OK, here’s one. This will do this one as an audience poll, too, I think. Would you prefer to have Donald Trump as your president or your father first? We’ll be president. Second, we’ll be father. Would you prefer to have Donald Trump as your president?


S44: Would you prefer to have Donald Trump as your father?


S45: So that’s interesting.


S12: So now when I was looking at this question, I thought, OK. So if it’s my father, then he’s not the president. And so basically, I see that audience response as one that’s taking it for the team.


S46: Right. Exactly.


S43: Hmm, that’s interesting. And why would I pose this in the cocktail before the show to a couple of listeners and one of them pointed out something also good, which is that you’d also be rich.


S24: So that would be cool.


S47: Are you somebody somebody in the audience said maybe.


S12: Does it matter if you’re a Vanko or Tiffany or one of the boys, were you?


S48: I guess would be get to be a Oncor, Tiffany. Right. I mean, it’s a different Experion has a white guy has like any one of those, Trump has the hair. Careful, Mike. Careful.


S24: I definitely would. Yeah. Pick him as father. You definitely take it for the team. Definitely.


S49: But I’m not sure. Would you enjoy golf? Love it. It would be great. Yeah. Golf, warm weather. I cheated golf to be my perfect fit right in.


S17: And you’re the one who’s the most approving of, you know, general corruption, bribery, scandals. Think greasing the PA into the family.


S39: And you could give them all the money away.


S13: To the extent that. And then charity close. No, no, no. I’m saying no, no. Run it. Run the charity. logit properly like with my re-enacting of Ophelia. But yeah, it’s plausible.


S50: Exactly. You could. Right. Exactly. Go on.


S12: OK. If you believe there’s a God who answers our prayers and influences our lives, what would it take to convince you that such a god does not exist? And if you don’t believe God exists, what would it take to convince you that God does exist?


S43: So I do not believe in God. And it would take so little to convince me that God exists.


S51: So you’re right on the edge. Yeah. It’s like. All right. God, if you exist. Put.


S43: I would. Do you even have like a million dollars?


S12: Put a $1 bill in my hand right now. I’m super right now. Then that seems like a big ask. Actually, God has better things to do than be putting something in your palm.


S35: But if he’s so good at everything, it seems like that would be pretty easy, huh?


S12: That’s what you’re looking for.


S30: If only our bills were easier.


S52: Okay. Does it have to be your God? Now, my God is the God of love and forgiveness.


S29: What about you, Emily?


S12: Well, I do believe in God. I don’t think about the answering our prayers part. That’s not at least my kind of Jewish interpretation of God, but I believe in God. And I don’t think it would take much to convince me that God doesn’t exist, because I have a kind of prime mover relatively in my main way.


S53: It wouldn’t take much to convince you that God doesn’t think it does not. Well, I know I would say it doesn’t make sense. What does that make sense? Well, because how do you prove the negative?


S27: My main feeling about my attachment to the idea that God exists is just the world is so complicated and beautiful and terrible and all these things that don’t feel rational to me. Like, how could there not have been some spark of creative unexplained energy in the beginning of it? And if scientists were able to really explain how life began. I feel like maybe I would have to admit that I was wrong about that.


S43: That I feel like they’ve done a pretty good job with that already.


S30: But that’s okay.


S34: I’m saved by my lack of understanding of such science. You’re talking about. What about you?


S14: I thought we were getting into heavy stuff later. This is on the first page. I didn’t you know your first page. Determinist.


S54: Given that there is so much suffering in the world that goes unanswered and so many people have so much and don’t do anything with it to ameliorate that suffering, that’s despite the consistent prayers of all of us who pray for an improvement in that situation is a pretty strong argument that those prayers are meaningless and yet it leads the turn.


S31: He makes it. Yeah.


S14: And yet all the joy and love and beauty and hope that still exists in the world is the reason that that hasn’t changed my view about God.


S19: So I guess it’s the strongest argument I can think of and I haven’t succumbed to it yet.


S27: But it does make a lot of sense to be easily convinced in one direction or the other. Right. I mean, there we don’t have proof, obviously, but it seems like a big thing to rule out. Like we don’t. It’s hard to eliminate it. But maybe you don’t feel that way.


S43: No, I think it’s hard to. I think you cannot prove the non-existence of God. I think would be very easy for God to prove God’s own existence.


S55: And God doesn’t bother God. Doesn’t matter.


S56: Makes you skeptical, too. John, give us a conundrum.


S14: Who would you, David Plotz, rather be locked up or hunted for sport?


S42: We really like this. I like this question a lot. OK, we’ll do this as an audience.


S4: Paul So start thinking I really am claustrophobic.


S26: I really, really hate to be inside.


S57: I’m assuming that that is am I locked up for life? Is that a life sentence or whatever?


S12: The period that you’re hunted for sport would be the equivalent period that you’re locked up.


S49: You have to think of it as not survive like a sport. If you’re a hunted for sport for like two years, you’d put your kids, you.


S58: And where are we in? What can you give me? Amateurs. Yeah. Yeah, yeah.


S14: OK. You’re in jail. Let’s make it in like 20 years or hunted for sport where you if you make it to the end of the field of play, you’re free 20 years, 20 years versus like an hour. Well, depends how fast you go and whether they get you with the arrow within the first five minutes. I think I assume, by the way, when you’re hunted for sport, don’t you figure it will be with like range weapons that aren’t like it?


S12: It will be rightfully The Hunger Games.


S33: Yeah, OK. So I think. All right, 20 years is tough. If you’d said if you’d said like 50 years, I would definitely take hunting for sport. And if you’d said five years, I would definitely take being locked up. So 20 years is a hard number. I think I would take hunting for sport. I really do not want to be. I don’t want to be locked up.


S23: Well, and then, of course, the question is what kind of hunted for sport? You know, I mean, do you get a big lead? Do you re running in sand and all the rest by that time?


S59: Most dangerous man. No, no. People people are chasing me. Yeah, right. What about you?


S25: Oh, I. I also tend to be claustrophobic. And the idea of being locked up makes me really antsy. But thinking it through, I think the more rational answer is to take being locked up.


S12: I was imagine being like kidnapped and, you know, really held in some terrible set of conditions, in which case absolutely. I’d rather run around even if the lions are gonna eat in the end.


S31: I don’t like being with other people much.


S18: So can we make it 25? No, no. A period of contemplative time would be kind of.


S47: It’s like being in a modest day. Exactly.


S4: Let’s you know, let’s do this as an audience poll. So first we’ll ask if you’d rather be locked up. Second, if you’d rather be hunted for sport. Would you rather be locked up?


S60: Would you rather be hunted for sports?


S61: More at this summit.


S39: Some of those people sounded like they wanted to do the hunting.


S62: Yeah.


S22: Onto the second segment, our social segment. Here we go.


S12: How do you tell your best friends that the person he introduced to you as the love of his or her laid their life is actually a disaster waiting to happen?


S63: Oh, my God, this is such a terrible dilemma.


S34: Dilemma. Have you actually had this up? No.


S64: I had a friend. This happened to with a sibling that the sibling, spouse, so few prospective spouse was somebody that this my my friend thought was unacceptable, disastrous. And he said something to his sibling and destroy it, destroyed their relationship.


S12: And then ever say anything for that reason?


S23: You think you don’t? I think we don’t know. The mysteries of the heart wants what it wants.


S12: And yet, if you really believe that and you think there’s some chance of fending it off. Be so hard to be quiet.


S28: And also as the person asking for your opinion. So I know someone who this happened to. But, you know, when they’re asking for your baby up, that there is one answer they want. That’s right. I guess that’s right.


S30: And that is to be hunted for sport, so to speak.


S14: But here’s the question. Could you wiggle? Is there a back door to doing this, which is that if it’s not about the qualities of the person they’ve introduced isn’t the love of their life, but it’s about the qualities of the of your brother or your friend. In other words, is there selection of this person demonstrative of a weakness that they have that about which they should be?


S12: That’s an elaborate ruse, which would be a better, more diplomatic way to go about it. But mine is perhaps not convincing.


S18: Yeah, well, I specialize in elaborate ruses. OK, well then no, stay quiet.


S12: We all think you have to stay quiet. Did it.


S22: All right. I’m going to phrase this pejoratively. Is there anyone out there who thinks you should not stay quiet?


S60: So speak up. There’s a group that thinks you should speak up.


S22: I would I would be interested in hearing an example of how that went well.


S24: But look, you can. We’ll take that off line, John.


S23: I would. Bob Dylan. Go to Salman Byles or with Salman Byles. Go to Bob Dylan. In other words, who is the coolest person in the world that everyone must actually go travel to to pay homage to David?


S19: You have specific views on this question?


S43: Well, I think it’s obviously it depends on cultural context and who you are. I think now the Obamas. I think the Obamas were that for a period.


S65: I think in sort of 2008 to 2010, there was this way in which anyone, the Obamas just like perked a little finger over and did show up. Now, is there anyone who fits that bill?


S16: Ha. There’s no I don’t. I think they’re beyond say maybe I’d say definitely the answer to this question.


S14: And what is the context of this meeting?


S12: Is it to go searing concert or is it to go he wants to talk to you like is there any way that she would come to you? No, there is not. There is no one who Beyonce I have to go to except maybe her mom.


S66: That’s it.


S59: Everybody comes to see. But do you think anyone that has to go to the Bob Dylan has to go see? I think the problem Bob Dylan’s body blow up. Bob Dylan’s like, fuck it. I don’t care. Right. He would. He is the misanthropic, right.


S12: Yeah, but the mobile has to go beyond, say, Bob Dylan does, too. I think everybody has to go beyond.


S36: Interesting. John, do you agree with that? What that what is Bob have to do?


S12: Because he has to go beyond beyond he has to like if there is a question of who is going to make the move, who’s gonna make the overtime be slightly inconvenienced, too, is it?


S14: I think he’s I think he would go see her maybe by picking through her keyhole down upon his knees.


S50: Yeah. It’s a little questionable, actually, that. Sorry. You know, it’s the one one person. I got it.


S67: Got it. I’m in the right. It’s actually that that song is actually I think about that.


S20: I think about what Obama Obama would Obamacans. He beat Beyonce and Jay-Z went to see Obama. Romney. Yeah, I think that’s true. But I don’t know. But not today. Probably today. The Obamas would be like, oh, can we get that repulsive? Does the pope ever. Do you think the pope would go see Beyonce? I guess maybe, perhaps not. But his lost man.


S38: Not to be dissing the pope or any. Now it’s. You don’t have to have to worry about it. OK. You can. He’s. He’s chill. He forgives. That’s too soon.


S43: What’s the most awkward professional setting to have to extricate yourself from?


S68: Well, I haven’t. I have a specific answer for this.


S41: I’ll start with my yes go yes, that would be good.


S4: My specific answer is you may have had that experience of being on a video conference call where you’re on a video conference call and you forget that you’re on the video conference call and you start to do things that you definitely should not do when other people are looking at you like picking your nose.


S6: Like making like texting other people.


S41: Like like, you know, I think the examples have been disaster examples. Are there other examples? And that is a bad situation because you cannot because there’s no good way to explain why you’re doing that. That’s that’s very awkward.


S69: That’s bad. That’s really what about.


S70: There’s also that problem of like, you’re right.


S27: I was thinking more of like a social situation where, like, everyone’s drinking and you’re uncomfortable. There’s something going on that’s like more out of work that feels like you don’t want to be.


S71: Or what if the what if the person sitting next to you is watching something they shouldn’t be watching and you have to get away?


S14: I don’t blame you. Here’s one that I was recently a part of, which is you’re in a small meeting setting and the person sitting next to you has fallen dead asleep. And and and their particular way of falling asleep. They escalate the snoring. So they’re gonna get busted soon. So do you really happen to.


S12: That’s never happened to me. Yeah.


S37: So it’s it’s so CBS, it’s that was not now is not the context. That is not the guy he was in.


S14: But then here’s the here’s the conundrum. Do you wake them. Yeah. And hundred percent. Yeah. But what if you wake them and they and they, you know, flail or about then you put them in a position because they could just can’t drift through the rest of the meeting.


S12: Maybe you try to really gently nudge them and you know that. Well then there’s a bad one now. That was yeah that was I was once teaching class with someone who fell asleep. Not the person I currently teach with. And it was really I. I have never been so mortified. I was so worried.


S41: You were with them while they were teaching.


S36: Yeah, well, that daughter goes to Yale, just like we like to get you there.


S40: How did this happen? Was it in the first part of the second home? And then they fell asleep while they were in your.


S12: Teaching someone, the other person and the students could be taking up a lot of oxygen in the room.


S72: So you kind of fade away. You were so uninteresting. Yes, exactly.


S12: But then I saw the others. I saw the students notice. And I got really uncomfortable.


S67: It was. Yeah, setting.


S14: Emily, you are made an absolute monarch of a nation sometime between the years thirteen fifty and sixteen fifty. But retain all of your modern knowledge and values. Do you keep being a king or queen or. It is very fluid between 30 15s activity or do you propose that the society abandon the monarchy and shift to a representative democracy?


S12: So does this question of vote for anyone else.


S13: The Monty Python skit in which King Arthur shows up. But like says, I’m your king. And they’re like, no, you’re not. We’re there. They call they’re a workers collective. They follow his workers. You know, you see the abuses inherent in the system that way.


S12: So I think that it would be a mistake to imagine, especially in 13, 50, that people are ready to take on democracy. I mean, we’re barely ready now. So I think you have to build up your civic institutions first and make sure that you have why withdrawing in between, because otherwise the whole thing could fall apart and be even worse than continuing with your minor, which I would be a benevolent. Would you start?


S35: What would you start with you? I would be a big nephew build you. Would you start with the justice system?


S23: Would you share things?


S12: Searcy what it Queen Elizabeth do? She did a really good job of this. What did Queen Elizabeth do? She well, she had encouraged Shakespeare. That was very helpful. I think she did other things, too. She collected taxes. Well, she build up other in between civic institutions.


S14: John, would you install democracy as we know from the attempts to install democracy and in illiberal countries, it sometimes there’s tissue rejection. And so would you as a single monarch have the ability to line everybody up a plus once you get a little taste of power? It’s really it’s hard to give it out.


S12: And there wouldn’t be things you could suddenly fix. You could try it. You could put people on a path to democracy. But I don’t think just walking away from your rulership responsibilities would be the right.


S43: I think we we saw this movie. What was the what’s the Hilary Mantel book about Thomas Cromwell, too?


S48: Oh, yeah. Yeah. The trilogy. Wolf Hall Woodhall Yeah.


S57: That he did. Cromwell is like this person who is trying to put modern man. He’s a modern character who’s put back in the time of Henry the Eighth. And so he’s trying to bring modern customs, modern economy, modern religious tolerance. So that’s his meccan. So that’s what you would try to do within within a framework of an absolute monarchy.


S54: So here’s the question. What, Emily? Given all of your modern knowledge into and so forth, would you introduce first to the citizenry?


S25: Right. Let’s see. You need.


S27: Well, I think you you need people of different religious persuasions to get along with each other. Right. You need less tribalism.


S28: So you need some interfaith council saying, first, let’s convene a meeting. You get them to stop hating and kill each other. And I think that’s actually super important.


S14: My interfaith. But wouldn’t wouldn’t you what piece of knowledge wouldn’t you have? Some piece of knowledge that would seem like magic to them in 13, 50? And therefore, if you could roll that out at the beginning, people would think you’re that much more magical and therefore you’d have even more power to convene your meeting at which everyone’s skill a nap.


S12: So let’s see, could you introduce some basic due process?


S40: Oh, no. I’m tell you about some some whiz bang thing we’ve learned to Boileau. Is it? Yes. Indoor plumbing.


S28: You think that’s the road to democracy? Everyone like you turn the lights on and no one feels ever.


S13: And then they have the leaves or time to start worrying about voting.


S18: The route of the human soul is through the stomach one way or the other. All right. Well, let’s let’s.


S4: Audience poll. This one would do if you were an absolute monarch, would you bring democracy or would you continue to be an absolutist ruler? We’ll start with bring democracy. Would you bring democracy to those benighted people?


S44: Would you remain an absolute ruler?


S73: Now has more resounding than I would have thought, a lot of democracy skeptics. Maybe you’d asked this question a few years. Oh, God, Lamar Balance just got Emily.


S24: You doing OK?


S12: Well, this one, I think, sort of relates to the last question. Would you rather be in charge of deciding the substance of society’s laws or the procedures by which those laws are enforced?


S23: That’s D. Wait. The procedures by which they’re made are enforced.


S12: This is enforced. You can reinterpret it if you want.


S43: This is a this is we have. Would you rather be Article 1. Article 2. Would you rather be the president or Congress?


S12: Well, it depends. What kind of president would you rather be?


S71: Freedom and equal protection of the laws or due process of the laws both in the Fourteenth Amendment. Is there plumbing?


S13: How do you make sure that it work? Hold people accountable if it doesn’t.


S35: Paul, what’s the point? You’re though. Yeah. Here.


S12: This is more about substance. I mean, I think if you have terrible procedures, the substance will be worth less. But I still I feel like the substance is more inspiring and aspirational for people to start with the substance. And that makes them more likely to create the procedures. It gives them a stake in the procedures without the substance, the processes to era. And so people don’t value it.


S23: What if you just decide, as most modern presidents have to just basically you can interpret the law as you’ve choose to. But because you have the ability to enforce it, then you can use your benevolent interpretation of the law to get actually the result you want. So you have the muscle to do it, whereas before you’re just trying to persuade people through the brilliance of your law setting.


S12: I mean, I think if you’re doing that to for your own short term gain, that’s not such a good idea. But are you talking about the warders benevolent?


S14: No, I’m talking about your cause. Right. It’s enforcement versus creation of the law. So I take all the bad laws that are created by that silly Article 1 legislature. And I just choose to interpret them my way. But because I have the enforcement power, people have to listen to me.


S12: Yeah, well, that’s supposed to be how it works. Well it’s just that we said we were only given two options. I see.


S66: So would I rather be the person who had the power to interpret and enforce. Yeah. Would I rather be right? Would I rather be the executive branch of the legislative branch? Ha.


S12: This is an interesting question to ask right now because the Supreme Court is probably on the brink of really changing how much the executive branch gets to do on its own. I mean, the executive branch really has so much power right now. So I think if you’re just answering based on what how effective you could be, you would choose the executive branch.


S65: You know, John, you have the power to go back in time and change the result of one presidential election, not 2016, not 2016.


S4: Which do you choose?


S23: I would choose.


S43: I’ve been thinking about this for a month.


S14: No, no, no, no. There are there are there are a couple. But. And actually, this would be with somebody who is more skilled would have a really more clever answer. But they election of 1876 in which Rutherford behaves beats what he’s given the election over. Tilden Hayes, the Republican. Tilden, the Democrat. Tilden beats Hayes. But four states, five states are kind of up in the air. They the twenty Democrats in those states give they give to 20 electoral votes, too. I think I’ve got this right. HAYES Hayes becomes president on the promise that he will remove troops from the south and that basically function and reconstruction ends and the rights that were given to African-Americans basically end there until 1965.


S19: Right.


S12: That was my answer, except I forgot all the names and dates the charts actually knew. So another good one, though.


S23: It’s just it’s it’s insane. I mean, we think we live in crazy times now.


S12: That was. So is it reassuring that that happened? And it was terrible and the country still continued or is it just show how really terrible things can get and people will still tolerate it?


S23: Well, and as you know, I mean, the country continued, but there was deep and profound. And I mean, the tonnage of suffering and lost hope as a result of that nice is incalculable. It’s incalculable.


S12: So maybe it wasn’t worth it.


S23: The country continued. Well, I guess the alternative is civil war. You know, 2.0. So I don’t know. But I guess the I guess the point is that that that was this much awful, which some people can look at and say that’s how much more there could be. I mean, so, yes, the country survived. But, man, it was it went, you know, brutal MLA.


S12: I have another candidate, which is 1820. Kate, because Andrew Jackson would have been a really good president to just kick off the list. How about you?


S22: I would pick. It’s going to be a perverse one may not be popular with this crowd. I would pick 1992. I would have had George H.W. Bush win a second term.


S34: David’s feelings about George H.W. Slayer’s, about Michael. Hi. I think there is a large woman.


S32: He has a theory that was their last chance to maintain a Republican Party. That was an establishment Republican Party that behaved in reasonable, rational ways and that that loss.


S24: We have the hyena’s here, that loss with a crucial to push the Republican Party further to the right.


S32: It also Bush’s raising of taxes. He had raised taxes and that was a reason he lost a lot of Republican support. And it it it made Republicans believe you could never move to raise taxes again. But why are you pointing at me?


S18: Because I. Because I want to associate and then disagree. OK. I want you agree and disagree. So I agree with all that. The only thing is you have the parallel thing happening, which is Gingrich in 94, which happens completely outside of the of of Bush.


S35: And well, but that’s in the context where Clinton’s already won the election. And they have they have they have Clinton to translate against Newt Gingrich. Does it? Gingrich doesn’t become the speaker that soon or in that same way.


S23: But Gingrich’s plan to take over Democratic control, the House, which has been going on for 40 years, exists and has been going on for years and years and years.


S27: He’s taking advantage of these really powerful social forces.


S14: Right. He’s been in he’s been attacking the system for a long before even Bushwhack.


S35: Yeah. But I think with him. But I think with a moderate presidential administration that is slightly cooled down, it is less effective.


S32: And the Seib Republican establishment stays robust longer in a way that would probably be healthy for the country.


S23: Gingrich doesn’t have the foil of Clinton to win in 94. Yeah, I think it’s still. But I I’m I’m ISIS. Hate yourself with your.


S74: You admire the jujitsu.


S62: All right.


S9: Dearest Oakland, our guest has worked as an animator, graphic designer, carpenter projections, film developer, television presenter, set designer, toy designer and gallery owner. So if he cannot answer these conundrums, nobody can. Please join us in welcoming the author of Every Tool is a Hammer. You may know him as the former host of Mythbusters, Adam Savage.


S46: Thank you.


S75: It is so difficult to be backstage while you guys are batting around these questions and your response to whether you’d bring representative democracy just upended my whole idea of humanity.


S12: Maybe not in a good way. No. Pretty dark.


S75: Yeah, it is pretty dark.


S23: Was there another question? The point of new arrival privileged that you would like to weigh in on from the previous round?


S75: Are you were truly feeling restive? I would first demonstrate if I was that back in time, I’d first show them how to make a motor, and then I would bring representative democracy right, because they would bow before you go going mad. Motor King. Yeah. And then I’d be like, see? Yeah.


S32: Well. What would be the oil? What would the power source be for the motor.


S76: I’d teach them how to make a battery out of a pile and then we’d start to like we you know I’d remember what I could about battery technology and hope that people were smarter than me.


S33: There’s a lot of ifs there.


S75: Welcome to my life.


S74: Adam Silver, if you could swim in any liquid other than water, what liquid would you choose?


S76: So you know that I have actually swam in a pool full of syrup.


S70: And what was it like? Tell me more.


S77: Okay. So there is a myth that you can swim justice fast and serve as you can in water. The idea being that because therp syrup is thicker, it slows you down, but because it’s thicker, it gives you more to push off of. And the myth is based on the theory that those two forces cancel each other and thus swimming in SERP is just as fast as swimming in water. Jamie and I actually went out to the Alameda County Sheriff’s Department. They let us dig 200 foot long troughs and filled them with varying degrees of visger syrup.


S12: We used guar gum and maple syrup. Too expensive way too.


S75: That’s literally like millions of dollars worth of maple syrup.


S12: Yeah, no one wants it to be maple syrup. Continue.


S75: There are crime rings in Canada hiding that much maple syrup. And I’m not kidding at all. And it’s cold and feels really just as funky as you would imagine to entertain. Oh, yeah. You know, did they cancel each other out? Totally. I swam just as fast and serp as I did in water. But if you gave me any liquid I’d love to swim in, honey. That would be weird.


S78: Sweet. Honey. Honey. Yeah. That’s a good idea. Thought of that.


S38: John Ginn.


S21: Although you’d have to fill the pool up a lot to keep refilling.


S75: Yes, you could cut it. Never. You always drink gin with a mark. Right. They can’t tell you.


S12: I wonder what it would be like. Do you think it’d be any different from what? I would be different if you let it into your mouth. It’ll be different. But do you think you’d feel different texture wise?


S23: I don’t know. I thought sure use it. Would. Would it be any different than Friday night?


S77: It’s thinner than water, so it wouldn’t. I think it would feel very different. And you’d weigh differently in it. I think you’d sink like a stone.


S36: Really? I often do. Yeah. Specially after the third one.


S35: If you’re if you’re in if you’re in like an oil or syrup, you float more because I might absolutely up. So I would have that. What’s the thickest thing. What’s the thickest liquor.


S79: That’s what I create. Yeah.


S42: Then what we did last thick with two or thick thick Brooklyn.


S75: No I think would be hard to cold. Honey has to be about one of the thickest most viscously really. Right to a whore. Yeah exactly. Or an old bottle of liquid Prell with the pearl.


S24: What would you and what would you do.


S12: Well my first thought about this is not saying good things about me. Wouldn’t be kind of interested to swim in blood and see what that’s like.


S40: You are you are not the old you are not the only vampire in the room. Somebody out there when it was first asked, said one, said blood. I wrote about the bursitis.


S12: And the other thing, I thought it was milk. I think that was just like a moment of yeah, I would be interested in that.


S75: It is both. I would not. For the record, that blood is only the most my nute bit actually thicker than water. So it feel very much like swimming in water, except it would smell like iron.


S67: Was it was that that makes sense, right?


S80: Was that ever a myth you busted. That blood is thicker than water? No, it wasn’t. It is just a fact. I came across in one of my books that blood is like point 0 1 3 5 percent thicker than water.


S21: Also, it is thicker than water. Yeah, the just a little bit.


S35: I never understood that expression in Germany. There is. I don’t understand the. Why understand the blood part. It’s like, oh yeah, we’re we’re brothers so we have blood. We. But what’s the water.


S18: What the hell. Why. Who’s right? Who brought water into the conversation?


S12: The most obvious liquid to compare. What else would you compare?


S18: And also everything else might be like blood is thicker than honey.


S34: No, no, it’s actually not in any conversation. Do you know the x ray?


S22: All right. Next one here in five hundred years, which is most likely to be a religion, Harry Potter or Star Wars.


S75: Starving.


S12: And are we at more movie as we must be, I’ve lost track of the Star Wars crowd. Yes, entirely. I have a dim awareness that there’s one coming out right now.


S33: But is it?


S57: Is it more like what’s gonna be a religion? Do you think? I mean, there’s so much of Harry Potter has really entered our sense of our mythology. It’s in our mythology.


S43: Star Wars is also in our mythology. Mm hmm. Well, or is there some other pop creation of popular culture that will be a religion?


S75: Look, I believe the Jedi is already in a recognized religion in New Zealand. But that’s just because New Zealand is awesome. Yeah.


S81: You know, that’s a really you say Lord of the Rings. No, no. I’m leaving.


S18: Well, you got once you tee up New Zealand, you’re really you’re pretty close.


S54: Most of what we know about the devil is actually doesn’t come from the Bible. It comes from the inferno. So that’s your point. Right. So is there anything adjacent that would that would and so probably Star Wars is more adjacent to a fixed or existing religion than in. All right. So I’m gonna agree with Star Wars. I don’t know.


S12: I’m the subquestion that I am. Neither of them are going to be a religion.


S82: OK. Heretic.


S12: OK. You come home very tired. You’re wearing a comfortable shirt. You take off your pants, special teeth, go to bed wearing the shirt in the morning. You’re running late, you’re feeling lazy, whatever. You wear the shirt again. Have you worn the shirt one time, two times or three times? The important conundrum that you are onstage for Savitz.


S75: I’d say one time because I’m applying the genes rule because I wear jeans for like 10 days at a time.


S12: Do you take them off in between? Probably. So then I think. But then do you feel like you’re wearing them one time just because of 10 days in a row?


S75: I do. I actually get like I get familiar to me in the way that each one has it, mainly in the shape of your body, even when they’re not attached to it.


S12: That is my favorite thing.


S17: This how many would not do on? I don’t know atoms so well, but I felt sure that of all of us on the stage, you are the least likely to actually do this. The jeans are the shirt. Both of it. Anything that involves I was gonna ask at a hygeine.


S14: So I always think that basically jeans are wearable napkins. So completely right. After how many days where you wear jeans and you know, you got it, you got some hot mustard. It goes how many days of wearing jeans nor normal eating patterns do the do the jeans transfer from being jeans into actually being napkins? How much food do you have to wipe on your jeans?


S75: I’m going to replace the word napkin with shop rag and say that it’s almost arbitrary when you stop wearing them.


S77: Unless I’m working with something like motor oil or cooling fluid, in which case the jeans are done at the end of that day. Okay.


S57: I think you worn the shirt once.


S12: I did you. And I think this is totally OK thing to do and should really we should encourage it more. And we should also realize that people just do things like this all the time and that’s fine.


S31: But if you. You mean not bathes. I need to sleep.


S61: Not that you don’t have that.


S12: We we are a culture in which people are constantly showering and constantly changing clothes and constantly, unnecessarily imagining that they smell bad when actually it’s probably fine most of the time.


S4: So we must have a word with male audience poll this question of whether you wear the shirt once or three times. So if you think you wore the shirt or what?


S51: I don’t even know how you get twice. How would you even get twice? Okay. All right. Okay.


S4: We’ll do once, twice or three times. How many people lady wore the shirt once.


S60: How many people think you are the shirt? Twice. I think how do you think you wear the shirt three times and literally you tune in to understand three times.


S34: It’s because you ought to sleep at a separate time.


S57: OK. No, the second time is you’re wearing it in the morning.


S38: When’s the third time?


S57: The third time is if you wear it. So you wear it. You’re right. Now I’m wearing the shirt. I mean, wear it to bed and then I’m going to keep wearing in the morning.


S12: Yeah. So I’m wearing it. Tibet as the second time and wearing it in the morning is the third time.


S34: But how do you get to two? You just don’t count the sleeping. Yeah. Yeah. I feel like you kept it on the next day. Yeah.


S47: But here’s the thing implicit in the two is that wearing it is a daytime activity and they’re like you’re going somewhere. Right. But then that means shirts are not to be worn while you sleep. They don’t even have an identity while you’re sleeping.


S36: And therefore nightshirt. What’s a nice shirt? It’s a separate it’s a separate thing. How many men are wearing a night shirt?


S14: If you were a nice shirt during the did two days and one night, you’d only be wearing the white shirt one night.


S83: That’s a good point. Yeah, that’s great. OK.


S12: Would you rather never be able to shout or never be able to whisper? So I think the proper answer to this is that it’s OK to give up shouting. And like, that’s the more polite answer and the more socially acceptable answer. The truth is, I almost never whisper honestly.


S67: Really, I am overly loud as a.


S77: And and it is a it is a thing that people in my life deal with. And I would give up shouting in a minute. Over with.


S12: You feel slightly mortified by how much you shout and how much people say that you shout.


S75: Yeah. It just comes out. And sometimes I see that people are shying away from the volume coming out of me and I. Yeah.


S66: Yeah, I I feel you.


S39: I would also like to say that I’d give up shouting. But then how would I communicate with my children?


S65: I would definitely give up shouting because the most effective people who are most terrifying are not the people who shout at you. They’re the ones who like. I’d like to see you right now. Yes. So a nice, low threatening voice for that, right?


S75: Yeah. Yeah. And for children, you know, an air horn. Yeah. True.


S11: All right. I’ve put this is really a question for you.


S74: So let’s say you’re a basically incompetent person. Is it better for you to learn how to fix things like fix the toilet around your house even if you don’t do it very well, or to pay professionals to fix it for you and then use your time to do what you do best and earns you the most most money?


S77: Well, I’m really bias.


S76: So this answer demonstrates all of my bias that you should learn to fix something.


S12: And why why should you learn something?


S77: Because as a serial gather of skills. Who is? I am mediocre at everything I know how to do.


S84: I have found that is all cross applicable.


S76: So there’s no downside to learning a new thing. What you learned while learning is applicable to everything else you’ll ever learn again in your life.


S77: And you have a richer and more fulfilling life along the way. Indeed, it’s totally steep, something Steve Martin says that at the beginning of his career someone said to him, you will eventually use everything you’ve ever learned in the pursuit of your career. And like truer words have rarely been spoken.


S74: I think I totally agree with that. And the people who think you should pay people to do these things for you. It’s basically an economist view of the world, which is like we’re trying to maximize efficiency and it is more efficient for you to pay a plumber to fix your plumbing than for you to waste the time to do it.


S32: But it’s it’s it’s kind of I was thinking about this and I was thinking, well, would you tell somebody who can’t write poetry is like a who’s someone who’s a plumber, who wants to write poetry, don’t write poetry, leave it for the poets. And it’s like, no, you tell the plumber, go write poetry.


S49: You should even if it’s bad, because it will bring you that will bring you something you want to learn, like the poet is in.


S27: That’s a poet who wants to write poetry. Not a poor, not a plumber who wants to write poetry, not a plumber.


S12: He’s like, Oh, my God, are you serious? I can’t do this. Why are you trying to make me do this right?


S55: I guess how I feel about fixing. But don’t you?


S57: Have you ever have you ever mastered something like that? And you’re like, Oh, I’m glad I did it. I feel so much better, but I’ve done it. What a sense of accomplishment I have, even though I’m never gonna apply it to writing my cool New York Times magazine stories that at least now I can, you know, I can I can now change a light ball.


S17: I have on very rare occasions had that experience, but I have so much more often tried to fix something, gotten incredibly frustrated and given up like Ophelia in Hamlet.


S30: Ha ha ha.


S13: All right. I guess I can’t re-enact Ophelia. That involves like changing a tire fixed, take the toilet, anything like now I’m deep.


S12: I’m very much in the flooding. You all the appreciation you can show for someone else in your life is good at fixing things. If you’re not, I’m really good at that.


S52: And so in off those things, please paint this fence I like.


S80: I wish I knew more things. Jack of all trades, master of none. I think that’d be great. But you know, the second half of that phrase, though often better than a master of one boom.


S41: Oh, did not know that that was good. All right. We’re new. One more question here and then go to the lightning round so this you can pick one member of the Beatles as your ally in the zombie apocalypse. Which one do you pick up?


S75: Yeah, it’s George. Of course. Harrison. George.


S78: Why? He is the most. I think he’s was the Beatles most attached to reality as it was.


S75: I’m basing that on nothing but my intuition.


S12: And four seconds of fly what you want in an apocalypse. The person attached to reality.


S76: Because right now the right birth, though you are making quick decision, Ed, all life and death. You want someone who is dealing with things as they are, not as they would wish them to be.


S14: And the whole wife thing with Eric Clapton. He’s that sees he’s got some grit from also John basically in bed naked with Yoko.


S47: Like he’s not getting out of bed zombie. I mean, he’s already super sketchy.


S12: But Paul McCartney, so chirpy, upbeat, like entertaining at every step of the apocalyptic way.


S75: Well, maybe he’d be serenading you while you’re killing zombies.


S12: Yeah. He’s a good man. Could be good.


S14: But he has some some pent up anger at always having his name being second.


S13: But any apocalypse. Everyone’s dead. You give me first, second laugh. No, no.


S14: I’m saying you’d want him on your side because of his pent up anger. Yeah. Can you ask number four, David?


S75: I think before remember four, OK. What does it say that none of us brought Ringo to that conversation?


S41: He’s going to outlast them all. Yeah. Which means he could be a zombie. This will be our last room for lightning round.


S11: Domesticated pets have now become the overlords of the earth.


S4: Would you rather be ruled by cats or dogs?


S85: John? No, no, it’s Adam. I’m this.


S84: This one’s a softball because cats would be awful leaders.


S12: Super mean. Yeah. I’m scared of cat.


S79: Look, if you die in your house, your cat’s going to start eating your face right away. Your dog would totally the dog. What? He’s hota. He’s going to wait a while. He’s going away to my cat. The cat is like, oh, here’s fresh meat.


S47: Good order. Chaos framed this Starlee. Wrong. They will both eat you. It’s just the cat will enjoy it.


S79: Dogs are just Phonce of unconditional love. That’s exactly what I wanted. That is a leader.


S12: Oh, yes. It would be chaotic, but much more fun.


S47: Also, the cats are so damn indifferent, they’d be like pestilence.


S12: I mean, the dogs, the late 60s and the. That’s like the worst of the 1980s.


S83: What country?


S55: All like parachute and zippers. The country or the cat? Yeah, in general, I feel like cats are some super kleptocratic Singapore. No, something more authoritarian than that. Yeah, and I’m kleptocratic. That’s interesting. A corrupt and authoritarian.


S75: Like, have you seen my asshole lately?


S21: Really? Your cat would be asking you if your cat could talk. That’s what he’d ask you. All the dogs would be what the dogs would be. Italy, the government fall? Yeah. It would just be a party. Yeah.


S47: Oh yeah. The food would eat. Glory would be awesome wine.


S86: The light would be gorgeous and everyone would be happy.


S66: Are there any other animals we want to introduce into this question mark?


S21: I think Gary rats would be great. Rats. Rats would be big, right? Rats would be amazing. Same for rise.


S35: Organized, familial. No, they’re just like really organized. Their familial. They’re really social.


S75: Rats are great. I’ve had several rats as pets. They are fabulous. But aren’t.


S14: But but aren’t most of the terms but aren’t most of the terms that describe governments and bureaucracies that go wrong related to rats?


S35: That’s just a misunderstanding.


S12: Rat’s nest. Saraf rat fucking did a good job with the rats leaving a sinking ship, which is sensible behavior.


S38: Not if they can’t swim.


S11: All right. We’re gonna do a lightning round and then we’re gonna we’re gonna go to your audience conundrums. All right. So lightning round. Super high speed. Super high stakes. Here we go.


S32: Would you rather eat only fruit or only vegetables? Vegetables and fruit, vegetables, audience fruit or vegetables? First fruits.


S45: Vegetables.


S21: Wrong. OK. Star Wars or Star Trek, can we no, no, no, no, no.


S87: Star. Star Trek. Star Wars. Wait. You said you don’t even know what’s going on in Star. I really don’t know. At Star Trek. Barely. I have like watched a half of Star Trek episode in my whole life. I’m sorry. At least I watched the first three or so Star Wars movies.


S51: It’s the answerthe Galaxy Quest. Spaghetti or lasagna? Lasagna. What? Look on me. But I don’t like either of them very much.


S87: What? Wait. What do you want? I’m not really that into pasta. I’m just.


S15: Now, clearly safer, answered John.


S50: It’s better to be. It’s better to be upfront about that instead of being an impostor. Yeah.


S51: Spaghetti makes me spaghetti. Audience first, spaghetti second. Past the spaghetti mas Donya.


S41: Big loss, found equanimity. OK. This is a good one. Would you rather work in a Trump administration or in a coal mine as a coal miner?


S42: I would rather work in a Trump administration, coal mine, Trump administration, Trump administration.


S4: Would you rather have the lights on or off if you knew the room was full of spiders?


S12: I like spiders.


S58: And on wait, you like spiders? There’s like a lot of spider, but still on, definitely on.


S12: And I don’t feel like this is much better for me than anything dead. I don’t like dead anything or like cockroaches. Much more upsetting snakes. Totally. I like snakes to snakes and spiders are OK.


S21: Well, like snakes, dislikes, pasta. That’s a good dating and also great and infrequent shower lights on or off.


S39: Come on. Never turning them off.


S75: Never go on. Like I used to hate spiders, but we actually did an episode in which I had to stick my hand in a chamber with hundreds of spiders until one of them bit me. And it wasn’t that bad. The bite felt like someone touched my hand for a second.


S6: Yeah. All right. All right. Last one. What will be the last line of your obituary?


S19: He was survived by his wife and two children.


S12: That’s what I want. The last one of mind, because the very last thing I want more than anything else, I care about my children surviving me. And I’ll be nice. And my husband survived. Me, too, but especially my children. I feel like that’s the most important thing that you could have in your obituary.


S7: Minus according to a National Park Service spokesman.


S88: The cliff is clearly marked on maps for years that year about it.


S89: That is our show for today. The gabfests is produced by Josslyn Frank. Our researchers BRIGID Dunlop, Faith Smith managed this live event. June Thomas is the managing producer’s late podcast. Gabe Roth is the editorial director of podcast. Thanks to the Fox Theater. Thanks to Adam Savage.


S5: And thanks to you, our dear audience here in Oakland, California.


S90: Good night.


S62: Hello. Slate Plus. So we’re now doing a Slate Plus segment and we’re gonna do some of your conundrums quickly.


S12: The con way marriage. That’s the conundrum.


S91: Go.


S12: It is really just very hard to fathom. I can’t decide if they’re really just not married to each other anymore or if they’ve just figured out like the most remarkable detente ever. I’m just. Those are the choices. Right.


S77: It’s super bizarre. And. Yeah. DE-stabilizing Lee Strange.


S32: Okay. If you could eradicate nullify one invention from the past 50 years, what would it be?


S56: The atomic bomb.


S21: That’s more than 50 years. Oh, crap. Really? How? You get the hydrogen bomb last 50 years? Actually, you can’t have a hydrogen bomb that was also more than 50 years ago. So.


S33: No, no. All right. We’re knocking that out.


S84: Part of me wants to say the cell phone.


S79: The idea. And people have used them all the time for those.


S84: I just want to point out that those of us of a certain age when we were teenagers, there was less than 7 milliseconds of delay in the analog phone. I was talking to my girlfriend in 1984 and it was like talking on the phone back then was such an intimate experience. You felt like you were in the room with the person you were talking to. And now it sucks so bad. Yeah.


S12: Should we get rid of the whole internet or just social media platforms? I would keep the internet and get rid of social media. I think I don’t know how you prevent it from dumfounded.


S14: Could we do this show if we’d grown up in an age of cell phones where we were all texting each other?


S12: If you would you will our children be unable to do such a show? Witman They can’t relate in real life.


S14: If we hadn’t grown up. Yes, and get off my lawn. If we hadn’t grown up in the age we did. Maybe the Gap has 30 years. We’ll just be texting.


S92: Huh? Now, John, if you were to meet yourself, do you think you’d be friends?


S39: If we were to meet? If I were to meet myself? Do I think I’d be friends? Huh? That’s interesting. So two of my oldest friends are in the audience. I think if I met myself when I was the age and we used to hang out, I don’t think so.


S28: But they’re really great. They are great. So there must have been very forgiving. Never been so bad.


S39: Yeah, I sometimes. Oh, my gosh. I think that poor guy. So. But I met myself now.


S28: Yeah. Yeah. Think could you be friends but irritated. You know Ecklie.


S29: What do you think? What habit of yours would irritate you?


S12: I don’t know so many.


S14: But here’s the thing. I’m more I’m I’m more generous now than I was back then, you know? So it would be both. Right. So you’ve gotten older on the one end and then on the other end, you’re more you’d be in a weird situation where you’d be lusting after your friend’s wife.


S33: You’d be like, we.


S39: It’s like she doesn’t know, you know, because. Because if I met myself, I’m so in love with myself, it would be like, dude, how are you? You know, I’d be. I would seek no other affections.


S30: This has gone into a weird place.


S43: Adam, would you be friends with yourself?


S75: I totally think I would. But there’s a thing that happens. I’m in my 50s now, and there’s this thing that I’ve realized in the last few years. It’s it’s harder to make friends as an adult. But one of the reasons I think it is is because you start to be able to see exactly how crazy everyone is. Right. And get to. And you see like, oh, you’re batshit in this way and you’re crazy in that way. And so friendship becomes this overlapping crazy sort of algorithm. And if you bite yourself, you feel like the same kind of crazy. We’re gonna get along great.


S12: Well, the same kind of crazy is hard to deal with. Same kind of anything. That’s why I think I would irritate myself so much because things that are too similar, I won’t read. What in yourself would irritate you? I think like the way I talk would probably drive me crazy interrupting bad do it all the time. That’s that’s a start.


S77: But there’s a difference between being in a relationship with yourself or being in a friendship with yourself. Those are two different things, because I think I drive myself nuts in a relationship, but I’d be a great friend.


S36: That’s good. Yeah, that’s good. That’s good. Yeah. Unction. That was a good question.


S22: All right. One of those. Let’s do two more.


S14: Would you rather be caught having sex by your parents or your children?


S61: I mean, isn’t the answer.


S66: So, huh?


S30: Isn’t the answer?


S12: Well, yes, if it ends, are your parents. Because you don’t care about traumatizing your parents at least like. Right. Your children are your responsibility and they’re the ones who, it would seem might be traumatized. So I think you are supposed to choose your parents.


S48: Someone disagrees. Yes. Let’s audience pull it. All right. So would you rather be. We’ll do parents first and children. Would you rather be caught by your parents?


S60: Would you rather be caught by your children?


S50: But doesn’t this matter about what age you. OK. Here’s how. What age are your children? I’m just trying to help them out. What?


S47: At what age would that change that age? The age at which you’re. OK. I caught myself.


S75: Lastly, I will say, when my when my parents caught me having sex, I was 17. I was proud that they had something against me at least. Were you in trouble? Oh, really?


S40: No. My parents were bohemians. They were is exactly what if you’d been a girl? Adam, the kitchen is for making food.


S75: But my when my 17 year old son caught me and my wife. Well, actually, it was way more embarrassing because it was like an hour later I was down in the kitchen making a snack and he was like, hey, next time, leave a sock on the door.


S51: And I was like, you can’t talk like that. We’re not roommates. He was that when you realized he’d call you or he he’d call you. No, that’s it. He’d come in.


S75: Yeah. We didn’t know. We didn’t notice him.


S62: He was stealthy. I guess we’re getting caught. Let’s continue this later. I think we should stop there by Slate Plus.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership. The following podcast contains explicit language.


S2: Hello welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for October 3rd 2019. We’re not fooling around here. Addition I am David Plotz of Atlas Obscura. I’m in Washington D.C. locust center impeachment America. That’s probably some CNN studio downtown. John Dickerson of CBS is 60 Minutes joins me from New York City. Hello John. Hi.


S3: And Emily Bazelon of the New York Times Magazine and also Yale University Law School School of Law Law School joins me from probably from New Haven. Are you in New Haven Emily or somewhere else.


S4: No I’m actually in New York. I feel like I joined a different show like this debate and you turned into a circus barker.


S5: Oh I don’t know I’m actually I mean I’m I’m just trying to artificially pep myself up.


S6: I’m having a slow start to the more I like what it sounds like OK Deb died.


S5: I was I was at Coney Island yesterday. I was at Coney Island for the Atlas Obscura offsite UNTIL I’M FEELING VERY carnival barker I see the tallest man man will swallow a four foot sword on today’s gabfest.


S3: We have so much Ukraine so much impeachment. First we will talk about what is going on in the investigation and how President Trump and his allies are counterpunching. Jon did you just say God did you just like.


S7: Well I just I like what you just because there’s so much that’s happened just between the time you started your sentence and right now I mean so who sued the prospect of trying to update it. And and is is it just daunting.


S8: That’s great. That is that is actually the story of the term presidency if there’s so much that happened between the time plots started his sentence and now then second impeachment.


S3: Trump a topic we were going to talk about a brilliant piece by Pete Wiener about why conservatives cannot break from Trump who has corrupted and debased them and his explanation is different than perhaps what you’ve heard before. Then we’ll talk about the Harvard affirmative action case involving admissions for Asian-American students and how that just took a new turn. Plus we’ll have cocktail chatter and an exciting announcement gab fest listeners especially West Coast gabfest listeners. Our annual conundrum show will be live at the Fox Theater in Oakland California. We’re coming to the East Bay December 18th for tickets and information go to Slate dot com slash live. That is our favorite live show of the year. We will discuss amazing conundrums that you will give to us hopefully living up to such classics as would you rather be a fish or tree. Please join us. Fox Theater Oakland December 18th for the annual conundrum show Slate dot com slash live. Tickets on sale Friday morning. Holy moly the impeachment Ukraine scandal is metastasizing quickly and grimly.


S9: There is so much unusual and hard to follow stuff happening there a incredible Bill Barr piece.


S3: Bill Barr is making a Where’s Waldo around the world journey to gather dirt or try to clear the president in the Mueller investigation. There’s an emerging showdown between the administration and Congress over whether the administration will in fact comply with any requests for evidence or testimony. The president is hurling grotesque insults at Democratic members of Congress and genuinely seems unhinged although that’s kind of his normal state of being. So maybe it’s not different anyway. John what are the most important things that happened in this scandal and in the investigation this week or in the last two and a half minutes.


S10: Well I think the most important thing really is that we is that there is a summary approaching upon a transcript of the president United States pressure pressuring a foreign leader to investigate a political opponent both the one in 2016 kind of tangentially and then specifically Joe Biden. So that’s the main thing. And as as Haley Barbour used to say sometimes the most important thing is to keep the main thing the main thing and the reason that’s the main thing is not only because presidents are not supposed to do that because their most important job is keeping America safe from when they do when they lose focus on that in order to. That’s not good. It’s also they’re not supposed to use the power of their office to hurt political opponents. But the other thing the other reason it’s important is that that storyline that that narrow storyline and the fact that it’s launched an impeachment inquiry in the House has changed and has changed the political dynamic for the moment the country is now 45 percent of the country on Thursday in a new poll that came out favors impeachment. So there’s a plurality of the country that favors it and and the public opinion on this has done something different than what we’ve seen before.


S11: If you if you look at the question that’s been asked on impeachment for more than a year the line of people who say that there is not that they don’t favor impeachment that there isn’t a case for impeachment hovers along at the top and below it these support for impeachment goes below. This is based on on polling from 538 and all the questions that ask some version of yes or no question about impeachment. They follow along basically in parallel lines and occasionally they kiss against each other but mostly they don’t support is above support. In the last couple of weeks or maybe even a little bit less those lines have crossed. So that’s something new for the last since you know 2018 middle of 2018. There are a thousand different rivulets coming from the main story which we can discuss. I guess the only other final point I would make is that there has still not been really what they call and I think Emily you’ll tell me if I think this is a Steven screen expression from Yale but there have been no charismatic dissenters yet. In other words there is nobody from the Republican Party who is not already in the never Trump camp who has said impeachment should go forward of sufficient stature to fulfill that bend in the narrative which which one usually would expect.


S12: Well talk a bit more about that in our second topic. Emily actually I want to. You didn’t get a chance to talk about this last week and there’s so many as John said rivulets. Let’s say they’re there they’re perhaps cacophonous mountain streams more than they’re rivulets. One of the ones that’s most interesting is this spectacle of Bill Barr the attorney general who doesn’t seem to be doing his actual job as attorney general he seems to be spending much of his time trekking around the world on missions for the president notably to Italy.


S13: And what are the mission that he is pursuing and is it appropriate for the attorney general to be pursuing the personal political ends of the president. Is that how the attorney general should be spending his time right.


S14: Well the buttoned up version of what Barr is doing is that he is properly meeting with foreign leaders to further an investigation of the Mueller investigation’s origins. He if you give him the benefit of the doubt has some credible reason to think that there was a problem with what his own intelligence officers at the FBI were doing and he wants to get to the bottom of it. And he is enlisting their aid.


S4: The issue of course with this. Well there’s a few issues. So one is just the notion of elevating what looks to be a grudge driven directive from Trump to the top order of an attorney general’s business. That means that he’s personally taking trips. And I think second is this question of whether there is any factual basis for thinking that the origin of the Mueller investigation was troubling in a way that merits its own investigating. If you think of it like yeah maybe there’s something to it then OK maybe you can direct the Justice Department’s resources toward that end. But if you think this is made up and that it’s really a another dirt digging expedition it seems truly alarming to think that the Justice Department is now enlisted in this effort.


S15: And I can’t decide myself like which way to think about this. It is different from Giuliani because Giuliani is a freelancer working for Thompson’s personal attorney and this is the official government business. But does that make it worse or better.


S5: That is a great question Emily on the one hand you think well Giuliani Giuliani is not not elected not appointed serves no government office is working for the private end the present.


S13: And we’ve outsourced parts of our foreign policy to him.


S5: That is an absolute no red flag in every possible respect that is the president you know using his personal employees to advance his personal agenda. But taking advantage of the resources of government I would commend to anyone who has a chance to listen to the daily dailies episode on Thursday has a great rundown of what Giuliani did and it ends up being a great summary of the entire whole spectacle actually. But but yet it does feel somehow worse that Barr who is an agent of the entire.


S3: Government of the American people who is ostensibly has some degree of independence from the president and that is turning the full might at the Justice Department on a private political enemy of the president to serve his political personal ends that I think it is. I think that that one is worse.


S10: I think I think if I had to read it although it depends on where you where you put the finger because on because because Giuliani is essentially just an extension of the president’s misuse of his office. If that’s if you sign up to that agreement so Barr is misusing his office and the purpose of for the purposes of doing something that’s political and not a top priority. And Giuliani is doing it on behalf of the president which is basically the same category open I can as far as destroyed a bureaucracy while doing it.


S8: He’s destroyed any credibility I’ve ever had powerful institution which has had credence. That’s true.


S16: Is that the context matters here and what I mean is that in particular relating to this particular moment of Castle’s scandal it was Barra’s Justice Department that said the whistleblower complaint should not be made public should not be given to Congress and that’s based on what looks to me like a very very shaky legal analysis of the Office of Legal Counsel.


S14: So I’m worried about that part to it already looks like Barr is implicated in suppressing this complaint and this scandal.


S4: And so the notion that he’s then off on the side trying to gin up lack of confidence in America’s intelligence agencies. Right. Like he’s over there discrediting their work. Now if you think they were up to some shenanigans then that’s a good thing. But if you have no reason to think that and they were just credibly doing their jobs that looks kind of batshit the.


S7: And if I could just staple on to that I think that’s I think that’s right. We may someday we’ll find out what if there is just like massive corruption and rot and T uncovers it. If there is only like a little bit of something then then this is extraordinary measures you’d kill on a fly with a shotgun and then I remember after Jim Comey has been fired.


S15: Right. Like we are you know that Comey did something very irregular in publicizing the Hillary Clinton resignation but did not do that before the election with regard to the FBI has increased into Trump. So there’s already been some addressing of FBI irregularity that does not support Trump’s theory of the case. And the notion that you know the FBI like look I’m not usually someone who gives law enforcement like a huge amount of leeway but they were acting in this urgent situation with this incoming president who they worried could be compromised in some way. So the idea that like now they could be on the hook for potential criminal violations or whatever bar is looking into and enlisting foreign powers in that inquiry.


S17: You know again like what’s going well can I just add to that which is essentially you’re saying is the time and attention that the entire law. Well not the entire but that the chief law enforcement officer is that well we get to call the attorney general sometimes they call the president that too. So I get confused. But anyway the attorney general’s time and attention is being arranged in this direction. Then we learned on Thursday that the inspector general of the state department turned over documents about basically some stuff that Giuliani had given the state department about what the inspector general or at least a characterization what he turned over what amounted to conspiracy theories inside the State Department officials with knowledge of Ukraine said this is crazy.


S7: It’s conspiracy theory. Nevertheless the push was still on to do this investigating. Why does this matter. I think it attaches to what you’re saying Emily which is the extraordinary amount of time and attention applied to this issue then continually applied to the issue despite objections from people with expertise.


S17: What was the governing national security interest. Is this one of the top five things that should get this much time and attention in a presidency. It was not the top five is in the top 10. It’s not the top 20. But yet it’s getting all of this time and attention and there’s an opportunity cost. That means that time and attention and focused isn’t being applied to anything else that’s happening the world turns out. It’s a hard job. Need time attention to apply to things that are super important.


S13: Yeah. And there’s also this other example when we look at the politicization of the Justice Department where it now appears that one hundred and thirty people associated with the State Department and Hillary Clinton are now facing a kind of investigation for having sent emails to Hillary Clinton that ended up on her private server.


S8: Actually they didn’t even send it to her. They sent it to somebody else who then forwarded to her and some of these material these e-mails was retroactively classified and so it was classified material. And so these people are having their lives turned up side down harried in some cases getting black marks put on their record that’s gonna make it hard for them to get another job.


S12: Hard for them to get approved for something later on for what is what is an utterly politicized and and completely malevolent malicious investigation. And that’s that’s another example of misuse misuse of resources. I want to turn actually now to a couple of other things. There are some other big big cataracts of water flowing down John. The president this week seemed genuinely kind of unhinged. He hijacked a press conference with the Finnish president. Poor Finnish president to rail against Adam Schiff and others. I’m going to lay.


S8: And he you know he’s Pete spoke at the whistleblower should be possibly executed as a spy.


S13: He retweeted this. This conservative evangelical pastor who predicted that Trump’s removal from office might cause a civil war.


S3: Do you think that this is it’s chaos still his friend. Which is it. It has been for the past three years. Is that still the case.


S17: Well it depends what you’re talking about impeachment or re-election. I think those polls are interesting.


S11: You now have and again polls will change but that they are behaving differently than they have in the past when there have been these big moments. So and but I think that you could have a positive. You could have a situation where I mean there are a couple of things that feel like possible dams are breaking. I spoke to a former administration official who anticipated that two things might happen. Some number of people who have other things they know about the administration or the president that they’ve been kind of keeping under wraps that are in the same possible category as the Ukraine as is Ukraine. And the conversation the president had even if he don’t think it goes all the way to impeachment it is the behavior it is the disordered behavior of of a disordered White House and this disorder is manifesting itself in all kinds of different ways. There’s this amazing interviewing in The Washington Post where the acting Homeland Security Secretary Michael Keenan in which he says he basically has no control over his agency because everything about immigration is being run out of the White House so that general feeling of chaos people who feel hey I experienced or witnessed or otherwise was connected to a moment of chaos they might start leaking about it feeling just kind of either liberated or or kind of wanting to get it off their chest. There are also possibly people who’ve witnessed other things that happen who start talking particularly if they’ve been subpoenaed. And so I think that creates a different atmosphere here that might all have nothing to do might add to the president’s behavior and really affect the election which is OK maybe not enough to impeach him. But but not worth going through this for another four years and I guess I would add one more thing about this week we should talk about quickly. Mike Pompei the secretary of state was asked on this week by Martha Raddatz if he knew anything about the phone call at that point the summary the phone call had been released.


S7: He was on the call we learned this week. We we did not know that on Sunday on Sunday. He he did not say what you would expect him to have said if he believed what the president has said which is the president said this is a perfect phone call if you watched the clip on this week. His answer was evasive. He didn’t deny but he just totally changed the subject. He was quite it appeared uncomfortable to talk about it.


S11: The reason I think that’s significant and interesting is a Pompeo has future political desires and so that that that video clip is not going to look so great but also the president’s argument is nothing wrong with the phone call. Remember how focused I am on the phone call.


S17: President saying perfectly fine phone call but the secretary of state who was on the call heard it firsthand was given an opportunity to say exactly what the president said at a moment where it really would’ve helped in that news cycle could have said you know what. It was a perfect phone call didn’t. And so what was that about.


S11: There might have been you know a reasonable explanation. I’m not sure what it is but that I think is another moment here that was important in the last week.


S16: I mean John don’t you think that one big question looming out there is whether we’re going to see more defections because people are worried. First of all about their reputations but also about their legal exposure. And it’s possible that you know there can be rats fleeing the sinking ship pretty soon although on the other hand if other big bombs and information don’t drop then I would imagine we won’t see that. And people will start to feel reassured and now I don’t I we have seen so few rats fleeing the sinking ship.


S3: When you think about how many scandals there have been during the course of this administration how many things where you would think oh my reputation is dead if I don’t cooperate there really have been almost none.


S9: I mean the only one you can even maybe not at is what’s his name the White House counsel who cooperated with Mueller and against John McGann.


S3: But even he hasn’t even shown up to testify to Congress. I think there is an extraordinary shift. I think people are much less concerned about their reputation or maybe they feel their reputation is tied up with a kind of conservative pro Trump movement that they don’t want to get on the wrong side of. And they’d rather there isn’t a kind of consensus opinion of the American people that they’re worried about they’re worried about the opinion of their tribe and their tribe is does not want them to to flip.


S11: Well it depends who you’re talking about. And we’ll get to the question of tribe in the next topic but I do think there is one interesting thing that a former intelligence official I was talking to mentioned which is a lot of this stuff the the conversation with the Ukraine president and other conversations that might have been in the same disordered category as probably been picked up by foreign intelligence. And there are other countries that have things and transcripts and phone calls that might not look so great in this new context if released. And if you were an official who was either on those calls or knew about those calls or participated in the the seclusion of the get that information to keep it from leaking within the White House it might not look so wonderful. And so there this person was always making the case that that some of those people who know about other stuff that’s out there if such stuff is out there might be inspired to talk for their own reputations to to kind of get ahead of of the story. And and that would be people in the category of not political types so much but you know people in the foreign policy community who who worked in the administration but aren’t you know aren’t going in attending every Republican rally.


S13: Emily one of the stories of this entire administration has been it’s since there’s been a Democratically controlled House has been its resistance to any cooperation with Congress won’t send officials to testify claim executive privilege national security excuses will not turn over a request documents will not turn over tax returns et cetera et cetera et cetera with impeachment. This is going to be go to eleven with these emerging legal conflicts do you think they are going to resolve themselves neatly if they don’t resolve themselves neatly. What are the possible ways they could unfold.


S14: The only real step the Democrats have is threatening to draw up an article of impeachment based on obstruction of justice.


S4: If the subpoenas them documents etc aren’t complied with and that’s more than they had before and I think as a result you’re going to see a little more turning over of information and making witnesses available to testify. We already saw that with the release of the call summary and the whistleblower complaint. But I don’t think we’re going to see a wholesale change. And what happens when the executive branch does not comply is the issues go to the courts to be litigated and they have not been speedily litigated in the courts. Technically Congress has the power to issue its own contempt citations but that just seems to be like basically a dead letter that doesn’t really move anything. So I think that we’re gonna see a lot more stonewalling maybe not as complete but certainly enough.


S12: There was a piece by Wil Wilkinson in the New York Times.


S13: He’s a well as a I would guess you would say a moderate Republican thought that rarely exists anymore arguing the president must be impeached and removed and cannot be allowed to run for office again. For this reason which is that he is set out to distort and shape and ruin the election to cheat the election if he is allowed to run and win. If he is if he is impeached not removed from office and then is allowed to run and win it means there is no integrity left in the system it means we’re willing to accept all forms of cheating and power politics and the misuse of the justice system US justice system for personal political gains for the sake of power politics for the sake of for the sake of personal triumph. What do you make of that John. Do you think that that. Well I mean it’s obviously true. But do you think that that that’s going to play with any Republicans will any Republicans feel like man if this guy gets to stay in office after the ways in which he’s distorted the the political process have come to light that we have sacrificed the possibility of having free elections and fair elections indefinitely.


S11: Well it feels like this argument’s going to sort in in a way that isn’t necessarily conducive to new learning. So for example I think you’d have so the traditional Republican response I think even from people who might be done with Trump would say sure the phone call with the president of Ukraine was not great but you know presidents try and use their office to get reelected all the time and this is and he’s disordered and and and shouldn’t be re-elected. All these other problems but that this isn’t this isn’t so much worse than the other things he’s done that it that it tees up that that that question.


S7: So I mean it’s an interesting argument. But I don’t I don’t when when I read it and as you repeated I didn’t feel like that’s going to that’s going to turn the the way. When I first when when somebody’s months and months of months ago said you know the question with Donald Trump is is do you really want four more years of this drama. That to me was a pretty clarifying argument.


S11: It may if made in the public square the people who who might even not like liberals or Democrats would say you know what. I don’t know that I want four more years so I didn’t find this is clarifying as say that.


S18: Slate Plus members you pay a little bit of money and you get amazing bonus content from the Godfather and others like podcasts you get bonus segments on every episode and today on our bonus segment we’re gonna be talking about red meat not red meat politics but actual red meat and the new study suggesting that eating meat is not bad for you. And which has so many people upset and up in arms should you change your behavior based on that study. Go to slate that complex gabfest plus to become a Slate Plus member today continuing on the impeachment theme. The true mystery of the Trump era made manifest made ever more manifest during this Ukraine scandal and the move to impeach is why Republicans stick with Trump. He has turned the party inside out.


S12: People who used to Valerie’s personal morality above all and politicians have fully attach themselves to somebody who is an immoral fiend. Republicans who held certain foreign policy principles have absolutely abandoned them who had certain principles about free trade have absolutely abandoned them dispense with concerns about budget deficits ditch the federalism they used to cling to so dearly welcomed kind of meddling and corruption that they never would have tolerated in a Democrat they are utterly entwined with the president. Though they know at some level they probably shouldn’t be for political reasons or for other reasons. And I think there have been different explanations hazarded. The number one explanation has been hazard is its brilliant self-interest that oh we’ve gotten lower taxes or oh we’ve gotten a lot of justices confirmed that that pursue conservative ends. But there is a new explanation out and that new explanations come from Pete Wainer who is a conservative intellectual but not Trump supporting one and John do you want to talk a little bit about what what his explanation is or what his theory is.


S11: Sure. Although yes just for the purpose of team that up. So basically he argues that there is a cycle that psychological impulse that kicks in that is essentially that belonging to the tribe is more important than any of those other things and that what happens is there’s a kind of snowball effect which is that defending President Trump is kind of the first thing you do. And then defending your defensive President Trump ends up being the thing that is most responsible for the adhesion that that’s the thing that keeps you no matter what he does. And this I remember very clearly with somebody explained to me with Paul Ryan one of the times he chose to speak out. This was even during the campaign. I think that Ryan was essentially saying you know if I speak out against this I’m going to have to. This is slightly different than Peter’s point but that that if I speak out on this everything I say you what you didn’t speak out about the other five things.


S7: Did just the first time having heard that three years ago was it suggested the kind of box he’s talking about. But but it’s more than just a box because the way he frames it is you not you start to gain. You start to sort of be delighted to defend the president and that you become me the way he describes it you become almost a different person because of the psychological adhesion and tribal feeling that kicks in from from making defenses of the president. Is that roughly what is that right.


S3: Yeah I think it’s the tribalism is the key word. Do you form a sense of group identity of harmony and cohesion which replaces that tribalism trumps the sense of personal ethics personal morality personal political ideology that had guided you because in some ways you’ve made this accommodation with someone you know is immoral someone you know has is wretched and the the way you get solace is the comfort of the group and the group protects you and defends you and welcomes you and then becomes immune to criticisms of its tactics immune to to people’s condemnation of them because that just further reaffirms your separation from them. And it’s it’s sort of terrifying Emily don’t you think.


S15: But it’s also so natural right.


S4: I mean I think another key element of this is that you become more and more convinced and the group reinforces this that the other side is worse. And so you see through the things through that lens and there are plenty of media outlets and social media posts that can feed your sense of that. And I think a lot of people just totally distrust what they read in the media or see in media that doesn’t write that framework. And so it’s partly like you’re you know trolling the other side and it’s partly that like the ends justify the means like you think that your ends or better until you’re willing to come up with a lot of this. And I think before Democrats get all like hot we should remember that we tolerated and put up with and defended a lot of Clinton shenanigans that did not seem to be confident with our personal ethics. I’d like to tell you about myself specifically because I wasn’t doing any work. I wasn’t a journalist at the time but you know like there is if there’s a lot of incentive to disregard wrongdoing by someone you think is right and I think that’s the that’s the intellectually honest way to approach this.


S11: And it’s why this question is so interesting because we’re all susceptible at one level or another to motivated reasoning and just throwing over things that were that were deeply held before. There is a strong feeling I mentioned something on Twitter because I was thinking about this in connection with my book aversion along the lines of what what David said in the introduction to this which is if you look at both on a policy and cultural stand from policy and cultural standpoint that the Republican party that spent years talking about deficit reduction now doesn’t talk about it at all trade immigration that the the GOP autopsy after the 2012 campaign had one policy recommendation support for comprehensive immigration.


S17: That’s 180 degrees opposite to what the party’s policy is now on questions of morality and truth telling Republican voters when polled. There’s a 20 point difference between what they believed in before Trump after. It’s okay now for a lot of people to not tell the truth. It’s okay now to have a lower moral standard. That’s a big switch in a short period of time. The response from liberals was you fool. They were always like this. Therefore there’s nothing to see here. It’s just the. And I don’t think that’s I don’t think that’s either the case or what’s interesting about the human behavior here. And so I think Emily what you what you put your finger on is right in the question I think for me the reason where this comes is that this is actually familiar. The whole way the whole reason the Constitution was set up is because the framers knew that human beings were susceptible to this kind of behavior that particularly when power was on the line demagogues and the tools of demagoguery would be successful or they knew that just wanting to stay in power would be successful and you would forgive. And as you see Bill Clinton’s a good example you would forgive the transgressions on the very things you said you cared about because you had somebody in there who in other ways was doing things you cared about. They knew all that would happen. So they put all these protections in place those protections have dropped and then the norms that used to cause people to say wait a minute you can’t do that are all basically mostly gone.


S12: There’s an interesting distinction I think between the political leaders of the party or the elected officials and the rank and file particularly senators. I think it’s probably the case that a lot of the senators make particular ones about a deal one on one with Trump in some way. Recognize that Trump is a malignant narcissist and they recognize also because they’ve been around politics for a long time and they’ve seen what you know what proper political behavior is and and what the guardrails of Washington are that what he’s done has been destructive and counter to the interests of a well-run government. But they are not going to break with him because not because they they themselves have been caught up in the tribalism although some of them have but also because they just don’t want to. They don’t wanna commit suicide with their party. They know their rank and file has been caught up in this tribalism even if they themselves have not personally fallen deeply into it. There is one one other point or one other question I have about this which is if this is the case that you have a this tribal list attitude about Trump how do Democrats and moderates try to peel people away from that. What is the mechanism. I think it’s because there are so many things reinforcing that Fox is reinforcing it. The president himself reinforces it. Every attack by Democrats somehow reinforces that tribal instinct what are the ways in which it can be minimized in which you can find some commonalities and start to get people to at least start to doubt or to lower their temperature. What do you think Emily.


S16: I feel really pessimistic about this. I’m sorry to say that but last week I was hanging out with some people who seemed like Republican voters and told me that. But that seemed to be the case and they wanted to tell me how they have utterly lost faith in the media. They can’t find anything to listen or watch that seems reliable to them. They dismiss the New York Times in the same breath as any other news outlet et cetera et cetera. That makes me feel kind of hopeless because it means that we don’t have a lot of way back to a shared set of facts and that kind of just reliability like making information not reliable anymore is you know like that’s what it’s like to live in Russia. You have no idea what’s government propaganda and what’s not. And if we start inflicting that on ourselves I’m not sure how you peel yourself off from a set of attachments that are themselves supported by disinformation campaigns right.


S13: You have to right. You have to create a common narrative and commonalities and people it’s so hard for people to find them as they segregate they said written their news consumption they segregate you’re getting that where they live. They segregate in their religious practices how great and how they work where their kids go to school. And so it is until you have points of commonality where you can find something which you do share it doesn’t have to be what you share it doesn’t have to be a point about President Trump. It may just be you support the same football team and cheer in the same way that it put it. But there are fewer and fewer of those points of commonality. And it does make it seem very very difficult to create any any break in the tribal division.


S19: Jon you’re assuming that when you find the points of commonality right like they can be personal and warm and full of love and friendship but they may not change your mind about a single thing in politics.


S20: Well I think the.


S11: I think nothing’s going to change. For a little well it depends where what we really mean about change here. Because I think it’s the adhesion is kind of there a couple of things there’s one is psychological. I mean all the tricks used to gain power in election are to create this kind of tribal feeling to sort of demagogue the other. And usually there’s a wall between what you do in campaigns and what you do as governing. That’s Wall is disappeared. Somebody could reassert that wall. That’s that’s one thing. But I think the the the problem here is that there is the psychological rallying that happens in in both parties and that’s happening strongly among supporters of the president. But I think there is that policy side which is for people who and this is why the president and his defenders have quite a rejoinder to the Jeff likes and Mitt Romney and all the rest because yeah they say they say you know critical things of the president but then they either vote with him or support everything he does.


S7: And the argument is basically look on the most important things he’s doing the right stuff. And and so I’d rather have somebody in there doing the right stuff on judges and regulations than Elizabeth Warren. So it’s both what he’s achieved and the threat that Emily mentioned earlier of the other. And we know from polling that both parties have a number of people. It’s almost no to a majority. I think it’s a plurality. I think the other party is not just wrong but an active threat to America. So if you add doing the right things on the stuff you care about plus the fact that the nominee of the other party will be an active threat to America. I don’t think you have to be psychologically you know overwrought to sort of say OK well my team is you know in a great but it’s better than the alternative.


S11: And so I think until you get I think all those things will allow people to kind of stay where they are until you have a big breaking moment and that will either be something that you know maybe Ukraine grows into that maybe not. Or it just becomes an election. And maybe nobody has a great revelation. But people decide and I’m just not going to turn out and the breaking moment ends up just being the other team does turn out.


S8: So let me let me close this with an alternative theory or maybe an additive theory.


S12: So in addition to the winter vision there’s also a theory from a couple of I think political scientists Lewicki and Lynn Blatt. I didn’t write down the first names and that isn’t much more a theory about political power why is it that there has been this extreme tribal ist instinct and why is it that the Republican Party has become basically a white Christian party party of white Christian identity.


S3: And the theory that they lay out is actually it’s just a simple math matter of power and numbers that the white christian majority in the Republican Party which is the massive majority the Republican Party is terrified of losing power and losing.


S8: And the consequences of losing power they recognize there’s been an extreme demographic shift in the country and as a result they are and they’re trying to hold on. They don’t want to lose the election because they’re worried they lose elections because they’re worried about what those consequences will be and they see really dire consequences and part of that’s a from a heightened anxious world view that has been fomented in part by Fox and by by Trump and.


S13: But they are willing to engage in any kind of dirtiness and politics to preserve that bunker polished that bunker identity including basically deal legitimating the system if you look at a state like North Carolina where they tried to strip power from the elected governor or try to the level of gerrymandering the the efforts to just restrict voting by people of color restrict voting by ex felons every every piece of the the armature used to didn’t discourage voting discourage political participation from non-white people is part of this.


S5: This this white Christian Identity attempting to hold onto its power. Emily did that move you my or my gloss on that move you.


S4: Well it worries me because then you start thinking that I mean when was the last time a group that self identified strongly as a group versus other groups and had hegemony gave up its power without like a huge amount of you know effectively like revolutionary effort. I mean you know think about like the white South Africans and what it took to dismantle apartheid. If we really are divided by race and religion ethnicity to this degree and you know the white people you’re talking about see their power is declining and as doing so at the expense of people of color like I don’t see how they go quietly into the night and the only way to think about changing that is to enlarge the definition of what it means to be like part of the group. Right. And so you want some larger notion of American belonging. And I think we’ve had that at certain times in history or at least we’ve had the illusion of that. And right now that light feels very well.


S11: The only thing is that the demographically they are not on the on the side of the train they’re going to leave.


S21: Right. But but but they distorted the political system so it didn’t matter.


S7: Well it does matter. We’ll see.


S19: The Yeah I mean we’ll see if their efforts may not be strong enough and they also may not in the end like care to disenfranchise enough people to make it work.


S7: But right now it feels like a threat that the trends that the Republican Party was consumed with just three short years ago or maybe for now continue apace. And and there are losing some of their own voters and that’s why partially what part of what you see in the strategy from the Trump campaign both in the last election and this one is is not just to maximize their base but to also diminish the size of the other one not just through specifically even anything of ballot access or any of that but just to just kind of bum out voters so that they don’t turn out that’s not a strategy built from strength. That’s a strategy built on you know on a tough hand and just trying to ruin the hand of the other person. But so implicit in that strategy is a is a is a weakness that that can’t just be solved. I mean not unless you like start putting tanks in the streets.


S22: Yeah well that’s right.


S19: I mean we’ve had other periods of this in American history right.


S5: That’s. That’s a terrifying. There could be tanks in the streets.


S16: Well or go back to the 1920s where you know the white mostly rural residents who were threatened by the census count because it revealed many more immigrants in urban areas just like it didn’t redistrict for nine years and passed immigration restrictions to slow down the changing demographics. Yeah. It gave way and I guess you could say go back and then the country rolled on. I’m never quite sure when I start thinking about the low points which conclusion to draw all right.


S18: A big affirmative action ruling from a district court judge.


S3: It upheld a Harvard admission practices as related to Asian-Americans. There’s a claim from a conservative legal group led by a man named Ed Blum said. Blum I’m not sure that Harvard was discriminating against Asian-American applicants and letting in certain kinds of less qualified African-American Hispanic and white applicants and therefore Harvard Harvard’s admissions practices need to be radically changed and shifted. This case will be appealed up to an appeals court a federal appeals court and then end up at the Supreme Court. But it was seen the district court ruling was seen by supporters of university admissions affirmative action as being a pretty big win. Emily tell us a little bit about the case where it came from and why it is seen as important.


S16: Well this case like you said came from Edward Blum who’s tried to litigate other affirmative action claims or I should say anti claims on behalf of white students. And this time he found Asian-American students to sue Harvard. And so that’s a better face for this effort. Better to have some people of color on your side. The testimony at trial like revealed the sausage making of the Harvard admission process and it didn’t always look great because college admissions at selective institutions are not fair. They’re just not like there are many many more people who would thrive at Harvard and Yale and all these other places. Then there are spots for that and so somewhat arbitrary decisions get made about who gets in and who doesn’t. And then there was a lot of letting in of legacies and athletes and kids from families who donate money at the school fully 43 percent of the white students at Harvard fit into one of those categories. To me that’s like the headline if you want emissions to be more fair. Maybe that is the place to focus instead of them. Far far far smaller number of black and Latin students. But that’s not what opponents of affirmative action care about. And so we had this suit and the judge’s ruling was you know necessary for maintaining any race based affirmative action anywhere. The reason I say that is that Harvard has all the money in the world to throw at admissions. And so it doesn’t have quotas which the Supreme Court outlawed in the 70s. It has this very careful individual review and whatever factors it’s using and the way in which it takes race into account if Harvard can’t do what it’s doing then basically I think no college would feel like they could continue. And of course the big question is what is the Supreme Court going to do when it gets this case. You know maybe a year from now maybe a little longer. And the problem I think for proponents of affirmative action is that there were enough unattractive facts coming out from Harvard that if a conservative majority of judges justices wants to end affirmative action like they can do it.


S23: What do you mean by an interactive fact.


S16: Well well from the point of view of some Asian-American students who didn’t get in they on average as a group had lower like personality personal ratings these kind of ineffable characteristics that make it look like there’s this stereotype of an Asian-American as being a less exciting student to admit overall. And like that’s bad. I mean that’s pretty inexcusable honestly. And it’s super unfair. The problem is what I said before like there is no real fair way to do this. I mean the notion that because you got an eight hundred or whatever the number is now on your S.A.T. and you had perfect grades you deserve to get it more like I just don’t believe it. I don’t believe that based on what I see from my law students at Yale like they come from a range of backgrounds they bring different things to the school. We could all be replaced in a heartbeat by other people. Maybe we should have a lottery at this point or these schools should expand the size of their classes vastly as my friend Daniel Markovich is going to be on the show soon argues. But like just there we kind of searching for some holy grail of like fairness admissions here and it just doesn’t exist right.


S12: I mean I’m just gonna make the point which Emily you’re not that a minute ago and which we talked about before on the show the way in which athletic preference gets used is just so appalling. Having spent some time watching the Northeast elite college admissions process through my daughter and thinking about it from my other kids it’s grotesque the way in which athletics has become this this affirmative action for four white kids essentially it’s affirmative action for white kids who’s way well-off white well-off kids who’ve been whose parents of invested them doing learning how to be good at some particular sport and spending a bunch of time on sport it’s fine to spend a bunch of time in a sport it’s good teamwork is great.


S13: Nothing wrong with it but the overvaluation of that relative to so many other things is disgusting and I don’t think I think it’s sort of unrealistic to get rid of legacy preferences.


S8: It’s just too hard emotionally it’s too important for schools identity and for for donations. I don’t think the same thing is true for athletics.


S13: I think schools could step back from athletics and it would be OK they just they just need to tap several of them do it at the same time and step back. What does that mean means. It means don’t don’t don’t give so many preferences to athletes who come in who are gonna make your fencing team a little better recruiting a little bit better.


S8: Don’t spend so much of your endowment and so much of your capital campaign on building new athletic facilities don’t emphasize in all your fundraising and your outreach the athletics is the key central pillar of what you’re doing. Don’t reserve so many spots just don’t reserve somebody’s spots in your class and instead say we’re not going to be a great you know the best school for four mediocre Division Three football. We’re going to be the best school for chemistry and we’re going to bring in a couple of chemistry Nobel laureates to be professors.


S3: That’s what we’re gonna spend on and we’re gonna we’re gonna have this reputation is like having the best undergraduate chemistry department of any college in the country. And that seems to me so much to be so much better if they were doing that. And but they’re cowardly.


S16: Can I add two things. The first is that I don’t think we should give up on eliminating or reducing legacy emissions. The second thing is that what these colleges are really falling down on is admitting low income students. And we talked about this with Paul Tough a couple weeks ago. It’s like that is a sham that it is a just shameful fact of university existence.


S24: And if universities increase the number of poor students they could admit more white students in along with low income students of color. And that could help address these issues of fairness in a way that you know would resonate with more white Americans and make them feel like these institutions were a potential part of their lives. I mean I also think Yes obviously it’s hugely important to support public universities in and wide angle lens but as long as we’re going to have this you know elitist meritocracy based on selective schools it needs to be more widely available to people across the socioeconomic spectrum.


S12: Right. Last question on this. Emily why would Ed Bloom bring a case like this with a private university.


S8: And why why isn’t the main attack to take down affirmative action at public universities first. I would’ve thought there’d be a much easier path if the Supreme Court really going to say Yeah I know there’s always with universities there. They’re always getting federal funds and so that’s always your back door to make anything a federal case in federal business.


S13: But Harvard is effectively a private organization in a way that a public university is not effectively a private organization is is the Supreme Court really going to meddle that deeply in the policies of a private organization.


S16: Well Bloom’s previous case that went to the Supreme Court was at University of Texas Austin. So that was a public university route. There is a parallel lawsuit that I believe he’s funding at the University of North Carolina. Another a public school and I think the Harvard and USC efforts are kind of happening in tandem and I don’t know exactly why the Harvard trial happened first but I think there is basically a coordinated effort to go after both public and private universities. Yes Harvard does receive federal funding. That is the backdoor way and I think also from the point of view of like optics I mean for the Supreme Court. Just imagine the opinion that Justice Alito or someone is going to write like Harvard this place dripping in money is not being fair and not letting in low income kids is not. Instead like it’s putting a thumb on the scale in a way that hurts Asian-Americans like that’s going to make. That’s a great way to.


S25: On the lips let’s go to cocktail chatter when you’re having your pumpkin cocktail like every time I go to a bar.


S12: It seems to be some protests looking pumpkin or pecan pie cocktail on the menu. Yuck. But when you’re having that John Dickerson What you gonna be chattering about you the thing about pumpkin.


S17: What happens when like suddenly whether it’s pumpkin or kale or cauliflower like they’re just quietly these vegetables or or I guess fruits. And then suddenly they’re everywhere. Anyway the story of big pumpkin should be told but it’s not my chatter My chatter is a great pumpkin Charlie Brown.


S3: It’s the Great Pumpkin. That was the story of big pumpkin.


S17: My chapter is about America in one room when I chatted about some number of weeks ago and this was this effort to address what we were talking about earlier and I had to bite my tongue not to raise it which is that there is actually a you know that America’s polarization is real. It’s a virulent but it’s mostly because in the political process has been captivated or has been controlled and continued to be controlled and the polarization makes it worse by people who are at both ends and who are maximally online. And you know exact maximum price for participation in politics but American one room took five hundred and twenty three registered voters from around the country flew them all to Dallas to a to a resort and basically did an experiment about what they believed about what things the labels were stripped away.


S7: And it found and it was done with the Center for deliberative democracy at Stanford and the National Opinion Research Center in Chicago. So this is you know the best of political science trying to put people in a room who are representative of the country and they studied.


S17: There was if they were given a fifty five page handbook that was prepared by policy experts and they basically did what you expected which is that they had notions based on their personal experience that were well-informed but not didn’t fit necessarily into the political scripts that we all have. People when they met each other even if they had different views they changed their opinions they behaved basically like human beings. And Emily Badger and Kevin Quigley wrote a piece for The Upshot about this and they also took pictures of all the participants which makes for a very appealing article in addition to the way it’s written. Now of course the big question is how you connect this experiment or and what it says with the way we actually do participate in politics and that’s a much bigger challenge. But there is it’s worth reading and looking at these opinions and ideas and people because they represent another large part of America that isn’t really a part of the conversation in the way we normally have it.


S3: Emily what is your pumpkin spice chatter. I think I have a special announcement. Pumpkin spice.


S26: Chattering announcement I do my special announcement comes from someone who e-mailed us about an upcoming wedding. The people who are getting married had online profiles and each mention the gabfest. And that’s how they met. Their names are Colleen Laurie and Rudolph. Long day we were picked up by this. So we wish you the most lovely wedding and a great day. And now on a very different note my chatter is about reporting that Pro Publica has been doing on audits at the IRS. This is like exhibit three hundred and eighty million in why it is expensive and rotten to be poor in America. The IRS is auditing the working poor at about the same rate as the wealthiest 1 percent.


S16: ProPublica reports that in a letter this week the IRS commissioner said the reason they’re doing this is that it’s just a lot cheaper to audit low income people you can use low level staffers their tax returns are complicated just easier to go check them. And so these huge piles of wealth and undoubtedly lots of tax avoidance is going on investigated because people in Congress especially Republicans have been cutting the budget of the IRS. And meanwhile the working poor are having the tax collectors drive them crazy. I mean this is just it just makes no sense. And it is so frustrating to hear about.


S12: My chatter I actually have a little thank you. Before my chatter which is there was a wonderful review in vulture of the ten most important political podcasts of all time and I’m so pleased to say that we were old enough we were top of the list we were the first one written about and it was such a lovely piece about who we are and what we do description of who we are and what we do. I’m just going to read a little bit it’s by me on any fact who used to actually podcast for Slate and Leon wrote that that we the three of us have a sibling like rapport interrupting laughing and teasing sometimes quite brutally.


S8: They are experts but one whose intimacy and affection for one another pursuit permits a kind of genuine intellectual candor. They are funny informed and sometimes thrillingly mean. Their thinking is collaborative they change each other’s minds. Listening to them is like witnessing an essay being written in real time by a writer trying to untangle an idea with our smartest friends. That was such a nice thing to read. It’s like being seen like all of a sudden we were seen.


S6: Well it’s either that it’s better than being seen. It’s like the best mirror ever with the greatest lie of it.


S17: But as a sign of my cycle psychological deficits it made me when I read it I thought Oh I’d really like to be that person as opposed to being a mirror.


S3: All right. My actual chatter is about an amazing solicitation that the Republican National Committee sent out in Montana. To raise money for Trump’s re-election and they sent out forms to potential donors that were labeled 2019 congressional district census and they look exactly like not exactly like extremely similar to the actual census forms. They look like an official census form but it’s a it’s then asked a series of questions that are designed to make you feel good about Republicans and bad about Democrats and then to prompt you to give money. But it has this quality of official ness and census ness and receptiveness that’s grotesque and it’s actually probably or potentially a federal crime is a federal crime to pretend to be the census. And here we have the very party that the president represents doing it and using his name to help him with his presidential re-election. So it’s another example of of the taking of the official government arm and somehow misusing it drag doing it in order to help the president’s personal political ends. It’s pretty gross.


S16: I’m sure the FEC would be on it. Oh wait. The FEC has no quorum and is totally and completely dysfunctional.


S12: Yeah definitely they’ll be on it. Right. Exactly. Well said we also get listener chatter every week. So many great listener chatters this week so so many great ones and I’m just gonna call out to you Angela at Oreo cookie Angela sent us a truly depressing story from a l dot com and Alabama news site about a practice which is apparently quite common in Alabama and also exists in other states where Alabama sheriffs have in their custody in jail somebody who is sick someone who has a sudden quite serious illness something maybe even fatal. And so while they’re transporting this person to the hospital for treatment they release them from jail they release the emanates from jail. Have the inmates sign a release form so the inmate gets to the hospital is no longer in custody and therefore the jail in the state is not responsible for any of their care and the patient themself becomes responsible for all the bills. And then once this health crisis has passed these people are often rearrested. It’s just vile it’s just vile and wrong and we should be ashamed. So thank you.


S2: At Oreo Tookie for pointing out that depressing peace to us that is our show for today the Gabfest is produced by Justin Frank Melissa Kaplan helped out here in DC who helped out in New York John and Alan paying. Oh the Berlin. He’s always at his post fourth on Twitter and at Slate gabfest. Tweet your chat to us and please if you’re in the East Bay the West Bay the South Bay the North Bay bass city please come to our December 18th show in Oakland at the Fox Theater our annual conundrum show. Got a second com live starting Friday morning for tickets for Emily Bazelon and John Dickerson David Plotz. Thank you for listening. We’ll talk to you next week.


S18: Hello Slate Plus how are you you may have seen there was a study there was five reviews published in the Annals of Internal Medicine this week by a bunch of scientists looking at looking at studies about red meat and they came to the conclusion that there is no health reason that they were able to discern not to eat red meat.


S13: That when you dig into the data when you look at when you sort of desegregate the kinds of people who eat meat from the kinds people who don’t eat meat and sort of take away the the distinction there that does not seem to be intrinsically in red meat something which is health damaging to the health or or at least we don’t. There’s not enough evidence to conclude that people should not eat red meat for health reasons and that got a lot of people up in arms. Why do get people up in arms.


S15: Emily I don’t know why did it get people up in arms. I will end up in arms.


S16: I just find these like dietary recommendations like they are like yo yos and I basically just don’t really listen to any of them and I’m not going to like start rabbit eating red meat because of this plus red meat is terrible for carbon foot.


S21: That’s why people got it but that’s what’s got people up in arms. Yeah. Because they are gonna take it away. Well yeah. No. But beep.


S19: Oh wait if you think the science is solid. Like


S24: you’re not supposed to not report on this health finding because the you rent. It doesn’t.


S17: You’re not on Twitter enough are you. I mean I know yes you’ve said two things that would get you on Twitter that would literally melt your phone. You mentioned Bill Clinton having done anything wrong in the context of a conversation about Donald Trump and presidential standards which would have melted your phone and you said that you’re not supposed to ignore science when it doesn’t support your other maximalist position on something else. This is not behavior you’re supposed to maintain.


S11: If you want to be get a lot of likes and have your ratio the right way anyway. Yeah it seems like it’s giving aid and comfort to a something that contributes to them the decimation of the environment. Also I think it probably hurts a lot of stocks for meat replacement and also there’s a whole like and this part is not. I mean you are supposed to eat lots and lots of vegetables and fruit and there’s a good reason for that. And so people who promote that for good and correct them right health reasons might worry that part of the push for some people to go eat fruits and vegetables is is that they were pushed away from meat. And so maybe this would cause a backsliding.


S3: Right. I think that it’s very important that we not put our personal morality ahead of the science and personal values about how righteous it is not to eat red meat and and to be clear about what it is and isn’t righteous.


S8: And if in fact that eating red meat is good for you or not bad for you that should be acknowledged and at the same time we should there should be really good science about what the environmental impact of raising so many animals for meat is and that and actually I’m not a scientist and I don’t even know the data from what I’ve been able to glean from little bits I’ve read in the press.


S13: The raising of cattle and the raising of pigs is tremendously damaging to the environment tremendously carbon heavy and that that is one of the key reasons to eat less meat and if we all took half of meat out of our diet they we’re eating three quarters of it. We would be doing a lot less damage to the atmosphere and so focusing on that and not getting too worked up over the health effects or not is make sense and I totally agree with you Emily that it is it is a fool’s game to try to follow nutritional advice. It’s just impossible right.


S16: I mean obviously like there are some like don’t drink like a wash don’t eat all the sugar in the entire world like there’s some out there so I’m not sure I managed to follow the second directive adequately on Sunday. But yeah it just seems like if you let yourself you could be having like significantly different diet like every week of the year and less time. Yeah you might genuinely miss red meat when you don’t eat it because I feel like I get off so easy here I just don’t even notice. Like months go by I don’t have any I don’t think about it but I feel like if I really loved it. Like if they were taking drugs away from me that would be a different matter.


S7: Well the wonderful jars that the food. Our attention to there are a lot more places you can get alternatives to red meat particularly in the lunch space where you don’t have to order like a sandwich because it’s only sandwich shops. You know there are lots of different kinds of foods you can eat now. So that makes it a little bit easier. But but the end and I think this was true at one point in the cycle of meat eating in America when it became when it was associated with poor heart health. What they found was actually that steak restaurants I think took God to actually a bump because what happened was people stopped eating red meat at home but then they treated it like a special thing. And so they went out to good steak restaurants and so that feels like. Interesting the right way to me which is I love a good steak. But in the same way when I’m trying to think of anything else that would be in that category. But I’m. But we’re talking like you know not that frequently here like once ice cream sundae. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So once a month and therefore you’d wanted to be done really well.


S3: Yeah I I definitely cut back on red meat although I think it is more unconscious than conscious and I. My problem is that I don’t really like chicken and that is the thing that people are always trying to shove down your gullet.


S16: If you hated chicken like genuinely like revolt from it I I I avoid eating it but you’re often served that you can’t get it.


S3: So if you go to someone’s house and they made chicken you eat the chicken and it’s fine you’re there things they’re good chicken dishes I just never I would never willfully order chicken anywhere. And that is the thing that is supposed to be the justified protein and it was I love pork and I quite like I like beef and very not in all forms but a bunch of forms. So I am I think I’m like you John is that I try to make it special when I have it especially with beef with pork I end up having a lot of pork in different forms just because I think purchased delicious is so good that I would I would find it hard to cut out pork but I agree with you Emily that it’s this isn’t like sugar and all the people I know who cut out sugar they’re always there always smugly telling me how good they feel and I and I get irritated with them. Yeah well they’re probably right I just think they were feeling they were just feeling bad before for other reasons. Maybe not having seizures. John is probably cut out sugar. You can have sugar John.


S7: No I’m just trying. But I don’t do is I don’t use sugar as the mid afternoon. Like Jack. Me back up that I that I used to write that I used to.


S3: Yeah. That’s definitely just that’s Doritos.


S27: All right those you eat. I was kidding. I like to read it. Both kidding he’s kidding. The idea that that would be a healthy fast food ever.


S6: Like literally I don’t understand Doritos at all. I want them to chips. I don’t understand it.


S12: Oh Emily. Wow. So Doritos are filled. They’re so crunchy they’re so filled with salt and mommy and. Oh I’d love to read.


S6: I don’t like how they smell good though they do smell.


S16: They do smell not great but do you buy any new food you’ve discovered in like middle aged adulthood.


S3: Oh yeah. Huh.


S19: That they’re basically all vegetables like things you just never eat before I know you’re like Oh I eat that a lot but bubble tea.


S3: No one for me. But that’s. Oh yeah. That doesn’t really count. I mean there are certain kinds of food recipes that I make. But you mean a kind of category of food.


S19: Well like I used to never eat nuts.


S16: I just wasn’t interested in them. And then I discovered a super yummy roasted unsalted.


S6: You’re not particularly yet or even a hundred percent and I love them. Yes.


S16: So you’re saying I’ve gone nuts yes I’m gone nuts but in this extremely specific way only from this one place only if they’re fresh et cetera et cetera what are they.


S7: They’re salted cashews.


S16: No they’re unfold that I don’t like salt roasted unsalted whole cashews from edge of the woods in New Haven.


S27: All right that’s it. Can we wrap this. Actually because I have to go catch a flight.


S6: Really. The kitchen’s keep talking forever.


S21: That’s really interesting. I guess so do not do not have whatever sense you’re getting started don’t get started. OK.


S28: I’ll do it by Slate Plus.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your slate plus membership.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for January 9th twenty. The Bomb Iran edition. We’ve had a bomb Iran edition before. Actually, as I say that, we’ve done that before. I’m David Plotz of Atlas Obscura. I am in Washington, D.C., where I’m joined by no one but in New Haven, Connecticut, on the campus of Yale University. Emily balafon of The New York Times magazine. Hello, Emily.


S3: Hello. That was a Joe lined up. It seemed like something more exciting. I mean, you did it.


S4: Oh, well, I had exactly the same reaction I thought. She’s really reaching into deal. Faggotry.


S5: I was trying to think if I could think of something interesting to say about you after all these years, that I have nothing to say about you.


S6: Well, I mean, he used the word sinecure a couple of weeks ago and we all rain down on him with fury of a thousand suns.


S7: That voice back after a trip elsewhere to beyond. I don’t even know where you were, John. I think I’m about to find out is John DICKERSON of CBS 60 Minutes. Hello.


S8: Hi. I was on I was I was on break. I was in Tennessee and Utah place. Both places with mountains. What was the first place? I didn’t hear Tennessee. I was in Knoxville.


S9: I love it when John says Knoxville. There’s Knoxville, where the rest of us East Coast people say Knoxville don’t get a good Knoxville pronunciation. Welcome back. On today’s gabfests, are we at war with Iran? Are we about to be at war with Iran?


S7: Are we done with our war with Iran, then, the unsettled state of the Democratic primary race? Presidential race a month before voting starts? Then what is happening with the impeachment trial? Plus, we will, of course, have cocktail chatter. What what’s happening between the U.S. and Iran? So John just teased us with his presence there. He actually will be back for our later segments. He could not join us for the segment we’re about to jump into. We are joined by Suzanne Maloney, who is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and an Iran expert. Suzanne, it’s been a nerve wracking week for Americans, probably for Iranians and for people throughout the Middle East. We had so many things have happened since we recorded since the drone strike that killed Kassim Lamani. But both sides seem to have de-escalate or seem to be de-escalating. So are we at war with Iran?


S10: Well, you could argue we’ve been at war with Iran in some way, shape or form, at least since the 1980s, perhaps dating back to the seizure of the embassy in November of 79. But we’re in a different phase, I think, of what has been a long conflict and often a war that only exists in the shadows. What we’re seeing now is much more akin to a conventional war. And at least a couple of days ago, it looked like it was about to morph into something that might be very reminiscent of the kind of conflicts that the United States has waged in Iraq and Afghanistan with such devastating consequence.


S11: Is this an actual de-escalation or is this just everyone sort of conveniently saying we’re just not going to do this right now, but check back with us in a month and we’ll be doing some damage here and there in some other fashion?


S10: Yeah, I I saw it described as the beginning of the end. I think we’re actually at the beginning of a new phase, which is going to be a long, ugly and unpredictable phase of conflict and confrontation with some quiet periods. But a lot of unpredictability about exactly where the next strike or when the next escalation will happen.


S9: What are potential options? What are the ways in which it could escalate from either side?


S10: Well, I mean, first and foremost, I think we’re going to see more trouble in Iraq. There’s an effort to try to push the United States out of Iraq. That is a objective of the Iranians. And now thanks to the fact that we didn’t bother to consult the Iraqis when we decided to take out a senior Iranian military commander on their territory, as well as an Iraqi militia leader.


S12: There’s a lot of unhappiness with our presence there. And I think it’s probably we’re on a road to a some kind of a drawdown of our presence, which will have real implications for the campaign to contain and deter any future resurgence of ISIS. It will have real implications for the stability of Iraq and the continuation of a government that can actually run the country. The Iranians will have lots of opportunities to push back against the United States and to try to retaliate without necessarily taking ownership in the way that they did on Wednesday with the missile strikes on U.S. military positions in Iraq. And that can happen almost anywhere across the region because they have proxies and assets. They’ve also struck over the course of history as far flung as Argentina, South Asia, Southeast Asia, Bulgaria.


S10: They have a lot of capability and it’s very far dispersed.


S1: I am worried about Iran pulling out completely of the nuclear accord from 2015. And I you know, you can trace this back to President Trump’s disavowal of that recall accord. And I wonder how much of this new, unsteady, unpredictable phase you attribute to that dynamic.


S12: I think it can be entirely traced to the decision in May of 2018 by President Trump to walk away from the deal, and even more so May of twenty nineteen when he decided to try to ratchet up pressure and bring Iranian oil revenues and exports down to zero.


S10: That was a bridge too far. It was something the Iranians couldn’t try to muddle or manage through. And we saw them turn almost on a dime from a kind of watchful waiting and trying to manage the situation to striking back in a very calibrated and incremental fashion to try to generate some diplomatic urgency. My own assessment is that the nuclear agreement, while the product of an enormous amount of work rightly contested on all sides and all parts of the world is on its last legs. It’s not going to be possible to return to status quo ante. And we’re more likely to face an urgent nuclear crisis with Iran than we are to actually get back into full compliance with that agreement.


S9: Do you think that Iran is going to conclude that it’s its major leverage in the region will be to have a.


S11: Your weapon, and so that’s going to be it’s going to really work on that development because it recognizes that the U.S. can’t be will not be a willing partner in allowing them to not have a nuclear weapon. So they might as well just go ahead and develop one.


S12: Well, I think that was the conclusion they made actually before the revolution was the show started, the Iranian nuclear program civilian at the time, but with an intent always toward something else. The Iranians mothballed it at the time of the revolution, but then very quickly reconstituted it. You’re not coincidentally because they were invaded by Saddam Hussein, who, of course, had his own nuclear weapons program. And so this is, I think, always been the Iranian assumption. They need the ultimate deterrent. They feel very much encircled by American allies and by hostile powers. And so there has been a really long term investment in these capabilities. The nuclear deal had the positive effect of putting some constraints on that, putting some brakes on that. But ultimately, it never really was going to change the Iranians mind in that investment. We’ve seen new intelligence coming out that suggests that, you know, the program is more advanced than we appreciated and that they may have continued working on the sorts of things they weren’t supposed to be working on.


S13: The thing I don’t understand about sanctions is so. So every time I’m a total lay person here, keep reading or we’re ratcheting up sanctions or ratchet up sanctions. How far can they be ratcheted? And is is the US’s position so dominant at least over the financial system, so dominant that the US can effectively choose to prevent anybody from doing any business at all with Iran? I mean, is is Iran in a situation where if the U.S. chooses, we can literally prevent them from exporting a drop of oil, importing, you know, anything of value to the country?


S12: Well, they’re always going to be able to engage in smuggling and barter trade and lots of other sort of creative means to get both their oil out and to get some necessary, essential products into the country. But the simple reality is that the U.S. does have a dominant position in the international financial system. The authorities that were put in place after 9/11, nothing to do with Iran originally were then turned toward dealing with proliferation as well as broader terrorist threats and apply to Iran in a really innovative and effective way. First, initially by the Bush administration with with real effect by the Obama administration. And there was a lot of doubt about whether we could go it alone under the Trump administration with the active opposition of all the rest of the world who are relatively ready to do business in Iran. What this experiment has showed is that the U.S., even without the support of allies and partners, is able to essentially sever a country from the international financial system and make that stick.


S7: So even if China wants to do a ton of business, even if Russia wants to do a ton of business, India wants to do it. But I mean, not if they do that. They just can’t.


S12: Well, they could. But they’d risk. They have to make a choice between doing business in Iran and doing business in the United States. And frankly, Iran is not that attractive of a market, particularly at a time where there is a surfeit of oil exports and production around the world. So, you know, this is not a choice between China and the U.S. market. It’s a choice between a country of 80 million, which is appealing, well educated, has a lot of growth potential, but also has a tremendous amount of dysfunction in terms of the economy, regulatory blockades, things like this. And so, you know, for a lot of firms and entities around the world, when they saw the Trump administration begin to take aim at the nuclear deal, they began to walk away preemptively, simply because it just wasn’t worth it to them to take the risk of in any way getting crosswise with the Treasury Department.


S1: So when we think about the tragedy of this lost nuclear accord, if indeed you’re right about its slim prospects for being resurrected, if you go back to, you know, the Obama administration’s agreement in the period before the Trump administration walked away, Iran was not acting in the way that a lot of people in the West ideally wanted. Right. They were still interfering in Syria and Lebanon and trying to increase their regional influence. And, you know, funding terrorism and acting like Islamic theocracy in a way that scares Westerners or makes people think of Iran as continuing to be this very hostile presence. Does that mean that President Trump’s skepticism about Iran is legitimate? Like, should we have expected Iran to take more steps toward good behavior in the League of Nations, or was it unreasonable to think they were going to more quickly walk themselves back? I’m just I always struggle with how to think about that period and Iran’s response to being in the accord, but not exactly. Behaving like a responsible nation.


S12: Well, that’s, I think, the fundamental paradox that we have today that, you know, we had an agreement that was working but didn’t solve the problems that were outside the scope of the agreement that were never intended to be addressed directly by the agreement. Do you simply junk the agreement or do you find other ways to deal with the problems that you’re facing from Iran? This administration actually had an opportunity to try to devise a follow on agreement with the Europeans, at least that might have tried to press the Iranians on at least some areas where the deal had fallen short. The deal didn’t address Iran’s missile development, for example. And this was something that was pursued pretty intensively in the early months of the administration with at least some resulting support from the Europeans. When push came to shove, I think the president was just fixated on fulfilling a campaign promise. He also, I think, sees that Iran is is pretty good politics for him domestically, at least up till now. And there just wasn’t any real interest or effort in investing in what it would have taken to try to develop a real negotiating track with the Iranians on everything that was outside the deal.


S9: How much, if at all, do you think what we’re doing with Iran is because it is very convenient to have an enemy and we don’t have any convene. We don’t have any other major enemies that are troubling us right now. And Iran is the easiest one to pick out, to demonize and to to attack.


S12: Well, Iran’s been, you know, sort of cartoonishly convenient adversary since 79. Everybody at that time was galvanized around the hostage crisis. More recently, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad became a sort of, you know, Saturday Night Live figure of mockery. And Iran plays that role. Unfortunately, its government plays that role very effectively. But I also think that, you know, what we’re seeing is really driven by a theory of the case about how to handle a recalcitrant power and how the U.S. needs to kind of retake the dominant role in the Middle East. And that it’s the the frustration with the Obama administration’s unwillingness to challenge Iran as it began to expand its influence and become very directly engaged and successfully engaged in military conflicts in Syria, in Iraq, and also, of course, in Yemen. And this administration believes that we have such overwhelming conventional military superiority that we shouldn’t be we shouldn’t be restrained in using it. We should push back against the Iranians. And they believe that if you push back really hard against the Iranians, they will, in fact, retreat. We’ll have to see if that works out for them.


S7: Do you think that the United States or the world is safer with casinos salomone dead than it was with him alive?


S10: I think the world is safer without Kassam Suleimani. I don’t think that the world is safer as a result of the strike that we undertook in the way that we undertook it with a very shifty set of justifications the administration has utilized and without any kind of contingency planning around the inevitable ramifications that have followed in its wake.


S7: So sorry, what’s the distinct make that distinction more so. So that he has bad influence, malevolent, malevolent Maleficent person, but that the methodology. Has ripple effects that are.


S12: It even makes perfect sense that he’s been on a kind of list of targets dating as far back as is the second term of the Bush administration. He is a critical commander. And while Iran has a pretty deep bench of security force leadership with a lot of experience and in in battle, you know, Suleimani had a unique role. And his the fact that we were able to get him on what is essentially his home turf, I think is a is a pretty showy demonstration of American might. But the reality is that you have to think through the second and third order effects of any action that you take. That’s what the military is incredibly skilled and well, well situated to do. And it’s just doesn’t appear to be clear that this administration utilized that kind of typical planning process. They really thought through and built up, you know, force protection, for example, around U.S. military presence in Iraq, for example, that they thought through the implications for the Iraqi government and whether or not we would, in fact, then be pushed out of Iraq. All of these things could have been addressed in a way if one was really serious about try about focusing on Suleimani as potentially a way of weakening Iran’s influence in the region. It could have been done in a way that demonstrated, I think, a more coherent and effective policy process and minimize some of the backlash. Instead, what we have is the worst possible scenario, which is, you know, a situation of what I think is going to be very sustained chaos. And we have not reassured our allies in the region. We have not really accomplished a significant foreign policy objective. The question is for me and for I think a lot of others, whether, you know, to what extent the kind of domestic positive boost that the president sees in his base at this time when he’s under pressure, may have made for him, at least offset some of the negatives of what it has brought around the world.


S1: I mean, I just want to add to that to think about this from a legal standpoint, from an ad that, you know, we just assassinated a government official, high up government official. This is a step beyond killing, assassinating, whenever you want to call it, people who are non-state actors, which the, you know, George W. Bush administration did after 9/11, which the Obama administration continued, that was supposed to be a line. There was like a real recognition that it means something different to assassinate a government official, that that puts our government officials at risk abroad or, you know, wherever that it, you know, changes the calculus for our allies. And so I feel like that’s both just like a legal moral point to make and then also one that has strategic implications.


S9: Do you guys think do either of you think there’s any chance that there will be evidence presented that will assure the American public that this was not an assassination, that this was a legitimate act of self-defense as part of or that they were engaged in a war and this was a legitimate military act as part of a war?


S12: I’ve read various sort of legal arguments on both sides that suggest that, you know, we don’t need to have had an absolute degree of imminence in order to justify this action from a legal perspective, which isn’t the same as from a policy or political perspective. You know, what we’ve heard from the briefing from senior administration officials on the Hill suggests that they haven’t really come up with a persuasive narrative, even for senior members of the Republican Party on the Hill. So I’m not convinced they’re going to be able to come up with a persuasive narrative. It’s notable that Mike Pence had announced that he was going to give a major policy speech on Iran this coming Monday. And instead, what we saw is he quickly canceled it after the backlash on the Hill. So I think there’s still kind of working out their story. And unfortunately, that’s not the way these things should happen.


S14: Suzanne Maloney of the Brookings Institution, thanks for joining us. Thank you.


S7: Slate plus members, of course, get bonus segments on the gabfest and on other Slate podcasts. What a great thing to do in the new year. Get yourself a slate plus membership. So many good things you’ve missed. My amazing story from last week. If you’re not a slate plus member. Amazing story, right, Emily? Totally amazing story.


S15: Amazing. I guess so. We’re going to play generator story.


S7: Yes, that is that is true. I myself use it to generate conversation.


S9: Go to slate.com slash gabfest plus to become a member today. Today, we’re gonna talk about the morning show, also known as the John DICKERSON story. No. The Apple. What is the call that Wahidi Apple Plus.


S1: It’s called an Shelvey Apple TV.


S7: The Apple TV story. It is not the John DICKERSON story. I didn’t mean that, John. Go to slate.com, plus gaffes, plus to hear that conversation.


S13: The Net. The presidential debate in the Democratic race is January 14th. There are only five candidates of the 24 who have been in the race who have qualified for that debate. We are down for this debate to Biden. Sanders But Judge Warren and Klobuchar, Corey Booker and Andrew Yang. I’m not qualified. Mike Bloomberg has not even tried to qualify. Julian Castro dropped out this week and threw a support to Elizabeth Warren. The race is. Is it? It either is wide open or it’s narrowing. I don’t even know, John. It’s a weird period. We have Sanders thriving post heart attack. Biden still solidly kind of in front. Warren, who’s lost her mojo, the pundit class trying desperately to make the case for Klobuchar. What are the fundamentals of the race as we are getting down to the moment, getting into the crucible?


S8: Well, I think and you and the Buddha JEJ boomlet bounces on. I continued to be interested in Bernie Sanders supporters, which we saw in the last race in 2016. We see it again. There’s this there’s a firmness and solidity of his of his supporters that is different than any other candidates, even Elizabeth Warren, though, there’s overlap in their policy positions. And that matters with the state of the race right now. But it also matter because he will hang on even if he doesn’t get the number of delegates and he’ll have a role to play. And so the longer he’s in the race as a viable candidate, which he certainly is now having raised a bit, beaten everybody in the last quarter fundraising, it means he’s going to have more throw weight even if he doesn’t get the nomination. So that that’s one thing that matters. I think no matter what, he raised thirty point thirty four point five during the fourth quarter million, butI JEJ raised twenty four point seven, Biden twenty two point seven and Warren twenty one point two. That that Sanders money is is amazing. And that’s also a sign of support. But I think that the pundit class with cloture, I wonder what you guys make of that and where that comes from. I have a theory, but I’ve talked long enough.


S16: Well, I think there’s been this question about the whole selection process. Right. I mean, partly because candidates of color have been not making the threshold for reaching the debate. And I think there’s just the sense that Democratic voters are not choosing them in large enough numbers. And so I think David lean hard and a few other people have been as pundits saying, OK, well, what if we went back to a world in which party elders, the folks who used to convene in back rooms, smoke-filled back rooms, had a larger say in this process, like what if all the Democratic congresspeople or governors were choosing the candidate? And when you start thinking that way, you imagine someone like Klobuchar having more appeal certainly than like Andrew Yang, who has captured some voters imagination. And so I think it’s particular recognition of club strength as this Midwestern senator who’s trying to make a more moderate and kind of pragmatic argument for how she would conduct the presidency. But then also some nostalgia about it, just a different selection process that isn’t as subject to the whims of the voters and to celebrity and like media coverage, these ineffable aspects of politics that are frustrating to people who I think are trying to think through or wish politics was more rational.


S13: Can I make a slight amendment to that, which is you began with this premise that Klobuchar has been knocked out of the race, because while the voters are not interested in cloture, the voters haven’t done a thing. There have been no voting. There hasn’t been. We’re a month away from voters doing anything. There’s been polling, which is some kind of proxy for something. And then there’s been fundraising, which is not at all a proxy for voting. It’s a proxy for some intensity of support and effectiveness as a fundraiser. So it’s it’s not quite fair to say that this is a voter driven, that that the voters haven’t expressed anything. It’s an attempt to undermine a system which chooses for celebrity, for ability to generate media coverage rather than something either electability or effectiveness in office. So that’s my job.


S16: I mean, you’ve obviously thought about this a lot. I mean, David, you’re right. I was using polls as a proxy for voters, and that’s really not quite the same thing. But, Don, I mean, if you were designing the ideal primary process, like do you have a thought out sense of what it would be? I mean, I just find it really confusing.


S6: Yeah. God love you for asking that question. So it’s it’s you know, would parties want is different than what a country wants. Parties want their ideas to go forward. And whoever controls the party wants that process to go forward. And there’s always a wrestling over who actually controls the parties. Parties have gotten a great deal weaker in the Democratic Party. Weakened itself more by reducing the power of superdelegates. In a perfect world, what you would want is both the voice of the people and you want the irrational voice of the people. OK, so you want people who have passions and push the system because passions and pushing the system is how you get social change. Whatever your goal is for social change, whether you’re a liberal or conservative, politicians are risk averse. And the idea of the politician who says we must go forth in this direction and pulls the country along, it doesn’t usually happen that way. They are more facilitators and conductors of social movements.


S4: And those social movements are full of passion and they’re not, you know, perfectly reason. So you don’t want to take out the madness of the of the population. But. You also have a second piece, which is that you can’t have a car, that is all you know, where you have this this incredible fuel for the car, but the car isn’t built very well.


S17: So if you have a candidate who doesn’t have the skills and attributes necessary to convert that social passion into actual durable and long lasting. Which is to say not by executive order, but through legislation and other things that are durable and long lasting. Then all you do is create a system that generates persistent frustration. And so you need to have some system for selecting for those sets of attributes that would give a person success within the system. And that’s where superdelegates and the back rooms and those kinds of forces used to select and filter for people who had some of the skills that would be necessary to do that two-part thing.


S13: But, John, I think you begin with a false premise that parties exist to advance some set of ideas or beliefs. We have seen with President Trump that the Republican Party, as it exists in 2020, the kind of ideas that it is pushing forward, the ideas it believes has practically nothing to do with the Republican Party and the ideas that it said it believed in in 2013 or in 2000, seven or in 2001 or in 1989, that there is very little continuity because you see, if you have somebody who in Trump’s case, is that incredibly charismatic mobilizer of people, that the ideas are actually slightly kind of irrelevant. But and so and so I don’t I don’t think I don’t think that that the party the party ideas have much valence at all.


S6: But you’re making my case for me when I was talking about is when the parties are not and as they aren’t, when the parties are weakened, as they do now, they don’t have the function that was previously saying they should have to in order to create this mix for the platonic ideal of a of a selection process. Parties are weak now. And as a result of their weakness, they have no ability to influence the process. And so what you have is a purely candidate to the people connection. And by the way, that used to be thought of as a as a beneficial thing for democracy, because you had situations where the people were kind of shut out of the process. And we know all of the bad things that happened as a result of that. So I’m not saying that people should be shut out again. What we want is, it seems to me, a mix of things. And so what you’ve correctly described in the weakness of the party and the Republican side, you also see that in in the Democratic side, as the parties lose their ability to have some kind of control to create this kind of beneficial balance. And so in the Republican Party, it’s precisely what you’ve said.


S17: And what’s fascinating about the Republican Party, just to take a brief detour, is the number of politicians who’ve decided that it’s that Donald Trump is not a special magician who’s pulling off a trick only he can pull off. You’re seeing some politicians who have ambitions for the future starting to to not just support Donald Trump, but ape the kinds of behaviors and things he says as a route to their own self-aggrandizement. And again, that’s that’s not the party making any choices. Finally, one quick point on the Republican Party and how it has no control over the the nominee. The Republican Party created did an autopsy after the 2012 election and said that it had to change in a number of different ways. They made one single suggestion on policy was, which was that Republicans should support comprehensive immigration reform. The next nominee and successful president of that party had the 180 degree opposite opinion from what the party approved opinion on immigration was to give you some indication of how meaningless parties are in the process.


S13: I just wanna make one other point, which is that we also see in the UK as a prime example of this. What happens when a party elite, when a party insiders maintain control of party decision making apparatus and the disastrous performance of the Labor Party under Jeremy Corbyn is the evidence of this. Here you have the kind of party the whole party infrastructure selected Corbyn. And yet Corbyn came to represent a view that was totally untenable within the actual desires of the British electorate. To the party elite insider choosing means not quite the same a smoke filled room because it’s a vote by all the party members. It’s not quite the same, but the party elite choice was also a disaster in that case. Emily, are you moved at all by the people who are making the case for club, which are under on these grounds?


S1: Well, I really liked club char in the moments after the last debate when she was just sitting around.


S16: I think on CNN and it just seemed like she was in this moment of I don’t have a whole lot to lose. She seemed so much more normal and candidate than I’d seen other candidates be. So I had this moment where my heart warmed to her for that. But I mean, I don’t know, I I feel like Biden and Bernie Sanders are leading the polls. They have been consistently doing so. They’re offering pretty different. Policy visions, different cases for electability, both of which are kind of plausible. That’s where the polls have been from the beginning and they haven’t really changed that much. And so this sort of casting about for another alternative reflects the weaknesses and the kind of caveat emptor the party, people in the party or watching the party are having, especially because of the drive to defeat President Trump. But I don’t think Globalstar is like really going anywhere. She raised a little more money. But, you know, I. It just feels to me like a sort of casting about. And also, it is true that if you’re following these races, it gets boring, like you need some new kind of shiny object to look at. To change the story. And so there’s a degree to which Club Cha is just a kind of confected example of that.


S13: I don’t have any real brief for Clover Cha. I mean, she seemed very smart. Whenever I’ve seen her speak in person, I met her a couple of times. She’s very winning in person with the one point I rise in her defense around is I thought the stories about her being a bad boss were so incredibly unfair and sexist. And I’m sure she’s the bad boss. I’m sure she’s I’m sure she’s a mean, vicious boss. There would not be all those stories if she wasn’t. But it is also true that people who work with Biden say that Biden is a bad boss. Sanders think reputationally, not a great boss. There’s a way in which the can’t eat salad with a comb is a phrase that is going to be stuck to her for life. That is unfair. And they wouldn’t be there if she were.


S1: Man eat salad with a comb being a story about Amy Klobuchar asking a staffer for a fork. Then when there was no floor getting super pissed and eating the salad with her comb, it’s a cheap shot.


S18: She’s a tough person. She’s a tough boss. And for that, that slander or Kate guess is not slander. That’s true. It’s probably true for that, too, to hang around her neck seems grotesquely unfair.


S4: I think you’re right. I think you’re right if there is a gender issue here. But more to the point, what do we mean when we. Why is it necessarily bad to be a mean boss? I mean, you know, Dwight Eisenhower, who was very good at the presidency in all of these ways that people didn’t appreciate at the time was known as the terrible Mr. Bang because of his. That was the White House named for him because of his temper. Temper. I mean, what are we really saying about the skills for the presidency or is it just being used as a dismissive thing? Like, what’s this? What’s the ultimate thing? Are we are we about to have a big, huge, long discussion about the proper management techniques of the presidency? Because I’m on for that. But that’s not what people are really anxious to have. They’re trying to find a thing, as they’ve done with lots of other candidates in their vote, whether they do it with age or something else that just allows them to immediately dismiss a candidate. But in my futile effort to make the presidential campaigns better, I’d love a long discussion of what some of these things that you perfectly describe, David, as a as a kind of limiting get rid of her out of the conversation thing. What do we really mean when we’re highlighting that idea?


S1: Aren’t we afraid that if someone has a terrible temper and is mean to their employees, that it suggests they’re going to rule by fear, that that’s not as effective a way to manage an organization there like as a fallout and costs for that? And you turn people against each other inside your organization and give people reasons to want to undermine you?


S4: I mean, totally, 100 percent. Yes. And that’s really interesting because. What? Because what? Because in the presidency, you can’t because it’s such a blunt instrument and because you have to move in and you’re not giving very much time to figure out the place and and the bureaucracy, which I say not in pejorative sense, but I say it’s just a big, massive thing. It’s an enormous organization. And some of the people who’ve been successful in making organizational change have done so by being kind of blunt and unpleasant. Now, is that the best way to make the thing move? I don’t know. But that’s a really interesting conversation because clearly the incumbent president manages in in a bullying way. On the other hand, if you’re a person who believes in his maximalist position on immigration, his bullying ways have gotten you results that you like. And the same would be true on the courts and taxes and other things. So I I would just love to have that conversation rather than the sort of theater review way in which her temper is used to make to just dismiss her. The two other quick just very two other quick points. I think the club HRP is not about club H.R. It’s about its pundits deciding that the target that that Democrats need to hit is a general election target in seven states that are in you know, many of them are in the Midwest. And so what they’re saying is looking ahead to that target, not the target for the primary and who’s going to win it, but in the ultimate race against Donald Trump. It’s going to be about these states and that her characteristics are successful for that state. The reason I bring that up is that this primary debate is always a debate about what’s the shape of the final target and everybody chooses a different shape of the final target. And then everybody is to. What has to agree on what the final target is, nobody quite has yet. And so I think the club a charged discussion is also about this uncertainty about that. And then the final point is if we realize the general elections are about negative partisanship and that basically what Donald Trump is going to do in a time tested technique is basically make the Democrats seem objectionable and completely out of the mainstream. It’s it’s interesting to sort the candidates in that fashion, each party making the others seem much more objectionable. And so which candidate which Democratic candidate sets up best if that’s the case?


S9: Emily, what’s going on with my beloved Elizabeth Warren? Why? Why is Sanders, as you say, so firmly locked with most of the same policy positions, yet as much older, much more infirm, much. You know, less appealing for me at least. Why? Why is she not doing well?


S19: Well, I think actually it’s important that Sanders came back from his heart attack and doesn’t seem infirm, like he’s been charging ahead with his usual vigour.


S16: And he has this really loyal core group of supporters. It seems like in retrospect, maybe Warren had this kind of lift from a lot of positive press coverage.


S1: And then as she kind of struggled to talk about how she was going to pay for Medicare for all, seemed to be evasive in those moments. I’m not sure how much the voters were paying attention to that, but the punditocracy cared about that and started digging her. And I don’t know, maybe that surge she had in the polls was based on not like the sticky loyalty that some Biden and the candidates like Biden and Sanders have been able to show with their loyalists. I’m not totally sure. I also wonder if in the whole electability conversation, the fact that she’s a woman and that people are worried about other voters, sexism is having some effect on her. I mean, I’m casting around for explanations here, but it does seem like Sanders has this much more sticky support than she’s proved to have.


S4: May I raise a question for the two of you to answer, which is medicalise just wrote the case for Bernie Sanders and Fox writers are taking on the case of making the case for the remaining candidates. And in his piece and I’m de-linked from it now, so I don’t mischaracterize it. But in his piece, he basically argues that Sanders Isma is a more wily legislator, an inside game player than his campaign persona would suggest, because if you listen to what he says on the campaign about he’s going to create a national movement, then it’s going to change. Washington weaves its its way out on the furthest out and of not just policy, but also kind of the way politics works in America. You Barack Obama had a was a pretty popular president and got a lot of people to come to his rallies. And even he wasn’t able to convert that into power in in Washington. It would would Woody Gilliss suggests perhaps is that basically Bernie Sanders knows that he’s going to ultimately have to work within the system and then since he’s done it before, that makes him a good candidate. So the question I ask you, too, is, is it okay if a candidate, let’s say Bernie Sanders talks about things in their most dreamy fashion, but knows basically in his heart of hearts it ain’t ever gonna be that way and that that’s not a sign of duplicity? Well, it is a sign of duplicity, but it’s a beneficial sign of duplicity. And that you want candidates basically to know that you have to sell things that they’re most attractive, but also have the realism to know how to get it actually done.


S3: I feel duplicity is a funny word for this because another way to think about it is maybe I mean, OK, let’s give him the benefit of the doubt.


S16: It’s based on his whole career. Bernie really does believe in free college and Medicare for all. And raising taxes to pay for it. And he just Gore will not win.


S4: You know, I’m not saying it’s not the policy positions. It’s the whether they can ever get through and whether his methods that he’s explained in the course of his campaigns for how it’s all going to happen by this creating this great national movement that’s gonna change Washington from its from its ways going forward, that that’s that I don’t think he would concede that they can never get through.


S16: I think he would say like the only way this was possibly ever going to happen is if we call for a revolution. And I get in office and I get my best shot. And like, I don’t think, you know, does he see the obstacles as, like a rational, intelligent politician? I’m sure he does. But I don’t think he’s willing to concede the notion that, like, this is all total pie in the sky. It’ll never get anywhere. I think he would point to other unlikely moments in American politics where, you know, the civil rights movement like that wasn’t poll tested. It wasn’t popular. People succeeded anyway. And he would say, like you, you have to we have to take the first step in order to maybe get further down this road. Right.


S20: Well, I guess my point is if if you accept the frame that the map was using, we’re nowhere near what the political situation was like in the mid 60s. That kind of change can’t happen when you’ve got, you know, Mitch McConnell on the filibuster used in the way it is and so forth and so on. But I think at the end of the day, you’re probably right, which is OK, if I don’t have any shot at all the more humans behind me, I have pushing for this, you know, large thing. Even when we fall short, it’ll be a hell of a lot better than the status quo.


S16: I think what’s funny about Matt’s case is that Sanders isn’t running as a pragmatist who, you know, worked with Republicans on veterans of their thing on revolution. And so the notion that, like we’re just voters, moderate Democrats. Oh, don’t worry about that man behind the curtain because he really takes the, you know, bipartisan or.


S1: However, the Democratic votes when he needs to and like hell, it’s just not how he’s presenting himself. And so I think that it’s an odd argument to make that like, oh, we shouldn’t worry about these big radical plans because that’s his whole platform.


S14: Emily, what is happening with impeachment?


S21: Oh, my God.


S15: I was about to take as if you were waiting for some big plots lined up. Yeah, it was that I have to such.


S16: What is happening with impeachment? The Senate trial has still not begun, as I’m sure our listeners know, the House as we’re taping, is still withholding the articles of impeachment, hoping for maybe some leverage in trying to change the Senate procedures, get the Senate to call witnesses. No indication that Mitch McConnell is going for this.


S22: I also think that the Iran strike by President Trump kind of put a pause on all of this and is now kind of part of the politics, of the timing of how all this unwinds. So we’re kind of in this pause moment. The most interesting development is that John Bolton, President Trump’s former national security adviser, who says he has exciting, important facts that nobody has heard yet, announced that he had decided he would comply with a subpoena from the Senate and testify at the impeachment trial. If he is called, I don’t know what this play is. Bolton could at any moment hold a press conference. Tell us what he knows. He could also ask the house or the house on its own, could ask him to testify. There’s no a special reason this has to happen before the Senate. Adam shifts committee could just call him up.


S16: I don’t imagine that McConnell will call Bolton. One does wonder about the timing of all of this. Bolton is thrilled by the killing. Are the United States killing of General Suleimani in Iran? And so it seems a little strange to imagine that this is the moment that he is going to betray President Trump with his exciting testimony. Maybe he would do exactly the opposite. Despite his disdain for Trump, he is, after all, a lifelong, pretty loyal Republican. So hard to know what all of this means. I don’t imagine we’re going to see him take a star turn in front of the Senate, but who knows?


S9: I found the excitement on the left about Bolton statement that he would onnot Senate subpoena so bizarre and misplaced. I mean, there’s nothing at all in John Bolton’s career to suggest he’s someone who’s gonna go in and knife President Trump in public in that way. Nothing whatsoever.


S7: He is somebody. He’s a party guy who. You want to support the party? I think I actually. I mean, you know, I actually think there’s it’s more easy to think that Trump wag the dog and some part of Trump’s Iran motivations, actually. Oh, that. Let’s just mollify let’s mollify Bolton while we’re at it. Because knowing that knowing that Bolton is such an Iran hawk. So either he doesn’t want to testify and knows that he doesn’t have to testify, but he just wants to virtu signal that he would testify. That’s option 1 or option 2. He would testify but not say anything that’s particularly going to hurt.


S9: The president might not help them, but definitely not gonna say anything that’s going to be super damning. So. So the level of excitement versus actuality there seems way. The ratio him way, way off.


S23: I had the same reaction. And then as I’ve been trying to condition myself recently, I realized I was just reaction. Reaction. I was just reacting to behavior on Twitter, which I’ve decided is a weird way to behave in life because Twitter is not representative of anything. But I nevertheless share what you’re saying.


S17: It was a weird, strange glee, if for no other reason than it just was totally uninformed. That all seems weird. He’s got a book coming out next week year, which means as since I do too. It made me first think, OK, who is the bigger book buying public? The supporters of the President, from whom he also would like to raise money for his PAC and who are big fans of his from years of appearing on Fox. Are they the people more likely to buy his book, or are the people who don’t like the president more likely to buy his book? And if you use that as your single limiting frame for what his strategy is here, how does that give you an insight into what he’s doing? This is all very, very deep into the realm of speculation. He also didn’t tell Mitch McConnell until right before left a message at McConnell’s office, essentially saying he was going to say what he was going to say. So that seems a little strange. Didn’t tell the White House. It all just seems like a weird mystery of running on stage at this moment. And also, by the way, what could he say that would actually change the shape of things in the impeachment proceedings? It doesn’t look like he’s going to be able to let him testify in the Senate, by the way.


S19: I mean, I understand that you’re speculating, John, but I’m glad you brought all of that up, because there’s part of me that just feels like John Bolton just wants a big burst of attention. And it is related to books and book sales and his own sense of importance and celebrity.


S16: And I mean, this is something I wonder about all the time with Rudy Giuliani. Bill Barr, these are old people who were off stage and are now very much on the center stage. And maybe there’s just something really tantalizing about continuing to generate headlines.


S13: Yes. And to be psychically rewarded. That’s the other piece. It’s not enough to generate headlines. It’s the thing that we forget about. Barr and Giuliani is that as much as Barr Giuliani get? Absolutely thwacked on the left and on left, Twitter and in The New York Times and so forth. They are receiving validation. Left and right are actually right and right and also right from the world in which they swim. And so in the world in which they swim, presumably Rudy Giuliani is not you know, he’s not been mocked and derided, but rather he’s been praised and affirmed for his stalwart support of the president. His creativity is energy, is aggression. And so that feels good. And so it’s not merely attention, it’s attention with positive affirmation, which is is a pretty heady drug.


S1: Right. And when you think about it that way, it just seems so unlikely that Bolton is going to destroy himself with Republican right wing book buying voters by taking down President Trump.


S17: I mean, David started by saying everything. John Bolton is believed that in his life, Donald Trump has done a very good job of supporting John Bolton. One of his earliest jobs was working in the Reagan Justice Department, pushing very strongly for the nomination of Robert Bork against a lot of what used to be called moderate Republicans who were in the Reagan administration. And Bolton was was successful, obviously, in getting Bork into the into the, you know, getting him nominated. He obviously didn’t get confirmed. But so on the judges question, the president is done quite well on the spending for defense. He’s done quite well. I mean, so for his entire in Iran, as David mentioned, he’s doing what John Bolton would like. So it would seem strange, extremely strange that a president who is delivering on every possible thing that a Republican of John Bolton’s kind, with the possible exception of flirtation with getting out of Syria and Afghanistan, would then suddenly turn on him and be forever, then known as the person who either A turned on him or B, if he’s got something really a real bombshell, B became the person who changed is the John Dean of this impeachment, essentially the person who changed the narrative, which right now looks like an easy acquittal for the president and the Senate.


S13: Emily, we talked about this last week, where week on who is enjoying the waiting game more? Is it Nancy Pelosi or Mitch McConnell? I do think I mean, just let me just give my thought for one second. The more I thought about this week, Nancy Pelosi, the House Democrats have done their constitutional duty. They have done their job. They have impeach the president. They’ve presented compelling evidence that he committed impeachable offenses. They have impeached him for those impeachable offenses. They have created a record around it. They brought in witnesses. They should just stop messing around and let the Senate do its job, even if they know the Senate is going to make a mockery of it, even if they know the Senate is not going to offer a fair and honest trial. That’s not that is not their responsibility. They know it’s no longer there.


S7: It’s the responsibility of the other August legislative body that the United States has. And the voters can see the Senate make a mockery of it. And then can, you know, can judge them accordingly. But I do think that Pelosi at this point has has. I don’t think she has any leverage. And I also think it’s making it all kind of weird that they did what they were supposed to do now. But the other body do what it’s supposed to do. Even if it does it poorly.


S1: Yeah, that seems right to me. I feel like this is gonna wind itself down. Yeah, quickly. Or it should.


S23: As of Thursday morning, there was some fibrillation in the force. On the Senate side, you had Dianne Feinstein and and a few other Democratic senators saying, okay, let’s get this sent over here and let’s get this thing going. You also had some Democrats in the House in let’s call them Trump districts, swingy kind of House districts who were saying, all right, let’s send it over. And then you had Mitch McConnell making efforts to Piner kind of move forward even without Pelosi. So it seems like it’s going to get going. Maybe as early as next week and then it’ll sit for six days.


S20: The senators can’t talk with each other, can’t look at their phones. It will be probably unpleasant for a lot of them. And it just basically at a human level to sit still and have to listen for that period of time, which they almost never do in their lives. I mean, who does in the modern life, any of any of us, John?


S9: I cannot remember you and I both covered the Clinton impeachment trial, which was also a witness list, but it was not. It took time. What do you do in a witless with witness?


S5: Witness Senate trial? Know when a witness. It also does happen in a witness Senate trial.


S20: Well, don’t you hear from the the managers, the impeachment managers in the House. They make their case and then the defenders of the president make their case. And then the senators can send up written questions to both sides. So then there’s the answering of that which takes place. And so it’s a lot of, you know, a lot of talking.


S9: It’s basically like an argument. Everyone makes their own argument, but without it being the questions being interrogated in effect. Way because there is no there are no fact witnesses.


S4: I mean, there could be a lot of interesting. Right. I mean, there could be, but there there won’t be. I mean, there could be fact witnesses that would be perfectly that would be perfectly reasonable thing to do.


S24: But but there won’t be. Let’s go to cocktail chatter. When. You are gotten off work as a juror in a trial. Going around the corner. Have a drink at the bar by the courtroom. You can’t really talk about the trial. Your beer. You shouldn’t talk about the trial you’re part of. What are you gonna be chattering about?


S19: Emily Bazelon I went to New Orleans in November to report a story about juries that will run in The Times magazine next week. And it was the first time I’d ever gone and done some reporting with a photographer. It was so interesting. And I mean, I, Larry, think the photographer who I was working with was amazing. He also had this fabulous assistant, John O. Ratman, who’s a photographer in his own right. It changed my process both because the photographer, like they were they’re part of the reporting, but also because I had these amazing photographs to look at as I was writing the story. And it just was so interesting to me to like it. I’ve been a journalist for a long time. I guess it’s kind of surprising I never got to do this before. But I’ve been thinking a lot about the power of photography in journalism, which is like in some ways a completely banal point.


S11: But it was really brought home to me by working with Larry and Jarno when I was a cub reporter at the Washington City Paper. There was a staff at hogger offer still there. Daro Montgomery, an incredible photographer, and Dara would come out reporting as the paper was slack on resources. We relied on resources, so he’d come out with me if I was writing a story.


S13: And I learned so much just from watching him work and that he he had this relaxing effect on the subjects of people I was writing about. It was great having a photographer, not in every situation, but when you have someone who is wise and careful and and themself inquisitive and in a different way than you, it can be really, really delightful.


S16: Absolutely. And the idea of like portraying to telling a story is a photo essay as well as a narrative or analytic piece just anywhere exciting for me.


S9: John DICKERSON, what is your chatter?


S23: Well, I feel like I now have to add my photographer anecdote, which is when I started a time you always traveled with a photographer and particularly in political campaigns. The magazine Pooler was with the magazine photographer. And so after some short period of time, I would I learned to always ask them what they were seeing when they were taking shots of candidates and of rallies and of because their attention and focus is on. What cannot be said, but which is sometimes far more powerful than what’s actually being said, particularly in politics. And now at 60 Minutes, where you work with these cameramen who are artists who’ve been doing it for 30 years, what they see when an interview is happening, what a person does with their face, when they’re asking questions, when they’re responding, when they’re listening to a question. I mean, they see the entire landscape of the human being with a with a kind of an acute focus. That is that’s fantastic. That’s why they’re so good. And so I I envy that experience, Emily. And I got to enjoy that experience myself. When I worked on one of my cocktail chatter, which is on the my piece for 60 Minutes this Sunday is about Venice. A few months ago, I mysteriously wasn’t on the show right after the gig. Considerable flooding, second biggest flooding in the history of recorded history, Venice and went through the city. And it’s a piece about what that flooding. And then the flooding that is now a part of the new normal of Venice. It was there was that one day on the 12th of November that was particularly awful. But then when I was there, the flooding was continuing. What it’s doing to this jewel of a city and then what, of course, that means for global climate change, because it’s it’s not just Venice that’s having to deal with these. What’s happening in Australia is a part of this story. What happened in the Amazon and California and this is the sea level rise. Part of it. But it’s a story about Venice and what Venice means for the entire planet. That’s the sun. That’s this Sunday. Check your local listings.


S9: My chatters about a wonderful Washington Post story that has put an idea in my head. The headline is People are seeing cats while high out of their minds. These are their stories.


S14: And it’s the movie Cats is in disaster at the box office. It’s been panned.


S7: It’s surreal and terrible. Taking this musical, which I loved as a child. Just full confession. I really did love it. And turn it into a movie with these humans in cat fur has caused the world to laugh and be shocked. But there is this category of people who are getting real pleasure out of it by getting extremely high and then going to it. And this is a story which they interview. A whole bunch of people have done it. And it is hilarious. The story is so, so funny. I strongly recommend reading it. Some people were terrified by it. There’s one woman who described vomiting four times, but ultimately understanding the film on a deep level. When the other person said when Judi Dench turned and looked me directly in the eyes, let me know. The cat is not a dog. I was terrified. Someone else described how she couldn’t get past the mismatched proportions of the cats in the film while she was high, because sometimes there were cat sized. Sometimes they were human sized, and sometimes they appear to be the size of mice. And that confounded her. It’s a very funny match of subject, which is the surreal bad movie. And and people stoner thoughts. I’m now intending to go get high and go see cats. That’s what I’m looking forward to doing in the next couple of weeks. So if you want to join me, let me know also if you wanna join me. Just a small thing. If you’re in D.C. this Sunday, I think Gabfests listeners know I’m a huge fan of group singing and there’s something which I think is relatively new to D.C. called the D.C. Sing Along. And there is a Sunday D.C. sing along in Adams Morgan at the Cheshire. So if you go to D.C., sing along dot com, you can check it out. I’m going to be there. I’m so looking forward to it. Emily, you should come down and join me to sing along.


S25: You don’t like that. I wish I could do that. We knew the New Haven version of that.


S7: Listeners, you have sent us excellent chatters. Excellent, excellent chatters and 20/20. Your new decade of chatters are great. You’ve been tweeting them to us at Slate Gabfest. And this week, Barbara, who is at Lucky Penny Make sent us a listener chatter, which actually a forward of another tweet thread from Jessica Price at Delfina, 7/7/07, which is a tweet thread about how cities. One reason why everyone’s allergies seem to be getting worse in big cities is that cities are planting basically only male trees and there aren’t enough female trees which cat trap the pollen. And that’s a reason why people’s allergies are getting worse. And it’s it’s just as hilarious and disturbing fact that that when arborists and in who are planting for big locations or planting, they tend to plant male trees because I guess male trees don’t fruit. And so you don’t have to deal with the messiness of fruit. But the result is you have all this extra pollen and it’s tree tree sexism. So check out this tweet thread around tree sexism off shift for today.


S2: The gabfests is produced by Josslyn Frank mitha Kaplin. Help me out here in D.C. I’m guessing Ryan MacAvoy helped out Emily in New Haven and I’m guessing. Helped John in New York City.


S23: You’ll correct me if I’m wrong immediately, it was destine up here in in New York City.


S2: Oh, Ginger Bay, mercifully, let Alan have the day off. Nice and hope Alan is out partying somewhere.


S26: Gabriel Roth is editorial director of Slate Audio, Jan Thomas Menchu, producer. You should follow us on Twitter at 8 at Slate Fest and tweet chatter to us for Emily Bazelon, John DICKERSON and David Plotz. We will talk to you next week.


S9: Hello. Slate Plus John and Emily have both watched the morning show, which I’ve only seen one episode, but the morning show is a show that is on Apple and there’s about a morning show discuss.


S25: I really enjoyed the show. I do not think it is great television. I completely eat it up. Nonetheless, the premise very quickly is basically a Matt Lauer story. So Jennifer Aniston plays is the co-host of A Guy. The actor Steve Carell, who right away gets fired for sexual misconduct. We don’t know exactly what he’s done in the beginning, but we get the sense he’s abused his power on the show in some way. And then from there spins out this plot. I’ll give away one other part of it that’s happens pretty early, which is that Jennifer Aniston kind of impulsively chooses as her new co-host. Younger woman played by Reese Witherspoon, who’s a kind of cantankerous West Virginian, like either shot in the arm or like disaster, depending on your view of the journalism she produces and her kind of challenge to the show. And I guess, Don, one of the reasons I was so excited to talk with you about this is obviously you’ve been on a morning show. And so you have some sense of whether the portrayal of the culture not like setting aside the sexual misconduct, but also just the culture on the show, whether that felt real to you.


S3: And then I was also just so interested in the sexual dynamics there.


S16: It’s pretty complex like the show does more than I think a lot of portrayals to get beyond the like very basic idea of some terrible predatory man, only one kind of bad misconduct. So, yes, there are predatory men, but they’re also women who are asserting their power or trying to use their sexuality to a to assert some power in a way that was not the like only kind of victim predator dynamic. And I wonder what you made of that.


S20: Well, I guess I have to give a little bit of a disclosure, which is to say that don’t freight. What I’m about to say as like, yes, that’s exactly what it was like where I worked. The things that are similar are and what I like about the show is that it’s I mean, any good show is you basically take you build a house, you build a structure with all kinds of pressures in this house that you’ve built. And then you release good actors into that environment. And all kinds of high stakes, fraught things happen. And you can build the house, any of Adam, anything. It’s be a police headquarters. It can be a fire station. It can be. You know, obviously, people picked hospitals a lot and television is ready made for it because you always have narrative interjections from reality. So you have, you know, fires and floods and emergencies that shows are doing. It’s high stakes. It’s pressure and deadlines which move the show along. And you have a class of people. So that’s all true both for reality and and the show itself. And then you have a class of people who are super hard charging and also you have not, unlike politics, people who get into the business for one reason and then find themselves some place down the road in it, perhaps for other reasons. And they constantly wrestle with that. So I thought the human balance of all of that was is just good drama, whether it’s and even in the cases where it was different from my own experience just was interesting. But to your point about me, there’s and there’s some fantastic acting in this, which is a which makes it just enjoyable to watch on its own. But there are a couple of scenes on the the sexual dynamics front that are and I don’t I don’t want to spoil them for people. But are just what you were talking about, Emily would show to a subtlety and gradations. And to admit gradations in the world is not to excuse behavior when somebody watches the actual scene I’m talking about. It’s just an amazing scene between essentially the Matt Lauer and the Harvey Weinstein character. Anyway, it’s there. They’re aware with the acting is is just just amazing. And and I thought, just like some of the characters are interesting characters, no matter what kind of show they would be in.


S16: Well, another thing I really enjoyed was the portrayal of the New York media world, which is depicted as like super catty full of to me, completely unrealistic interactions between this female magazine journalist who’s kind of slinking or sleuthing around trying to sort of investigate. But she is.


S3: So she says things to her sources. I would never say in a million years.


S27: Wondering what you thought about that. It made me feel like there’s some whole approach to reporting going on that I literally like have never heard of. My wife, which is to like excoriate now newly powerful people and tell them you’re about to take them dead. That is what like walts out of lunch.


S4: Well, there is. You know that, right? So there there are those things that are not factually true, but have a truth to them.


S23: And then there are those things that are. Wow. That’s pretty close to the way it actually goes. And then there are things that eat either. And she seems to be full of that. It’s like it’s a cartoon character of what that what the relationship between is sort of gossipy magazine writer who covers the industry would be like. And and the reality, which isn’t to say I mean, there’s an entire institution and the obsession with the gossipy undulations of the who’s up, who’s down in the ratings and all of that, which in parts of the show are well, well done in the magazine world.


S17: There is that does exist. I mean, there are people out there who do, but they don’t do it the way that that one character does, which is that one character has a kind of super power like this super power, which is outsized in the messiness. One of the things that shoguns does well is the messiness of just the whole process of both life, but also of life in this particular zoo. And the magazine reporter is too perfect. You know, she has these superpowers that work and and she wields them.


S20: And it seems out of shape with the gradations that are in the rest of the characters in the show.


S3: And what did you think of the discussions about coverage on the morning show? Because one of the things about the Reese Witherspoon character is she’s asking for hard air hitting pieces. And some of the ideas it brings up seem like utterly unsuited. Right. They just they’re just more abstract or policy driven. It’s like you’re listening to some explainer piece and imagining it on a morning show and like, no, that’s not going to work. But then you see these moments of them covering cooking for celebrities that feel like, OK. Yes. I mean, in the moment in which one super dramatic thing happens, they’re reporting on like an outbreak of people getting sick on a cruise ship. Right. And I was really struck by the just difficulty of balancing these different kinds of stories.


S17: Well, it depends which of the morning shows one is on where the where the balance is more difficult to do. I think my own experience, I’ll I’ll just go to that. What it was definitely very hard. I mean, this happens in any broadcast. But, you know, you have a limited amount of time. You have commercial breaks, you have things shifting. One thing that it would be more fun to see in the show is one of the things that that struck me about the extraordinary talent of the people in the control room is that news is breaking all the time, even if there’s not breaking news because. And segments run longer and there’s conversations that are always read tailoring the show as it’s being made. I mean, the plane is being flown as it’s being built, and that creates all kinds of high excitement, drama, even when the stories are relatively straight up, the CTM is a more news focused. And so this didn’t happen so much, but there was a lot of time. There were times where you would and they would usually warn you about this that you would make a turn even if it was just in the news portion of the show, a turn between something that was really grim and solemn and then something that was newsworthy but not I mean, in other words, it wasn’t you didn’t go from somber and grim to lighter than air, but you would sometimes go from somber to human interest or kind of something that’s that’s newsworthy. But but not as solemn and new, they would warn you and say, like, be careful and the turn here so that you wouldn’t. And he usually actually went the other way, which is you you were, as you were saying, something that was kind of fun. And then, you know, and now we turn to this incredibly glum thing. So usually they’d warn warn you about that. It’s a little it’s a little overdone in the show. But that’s just relative to my experience. I don’t know if on the other real morning shows that head snapping happens as much.


S16: Well, I really recommend the show. I mean, it flawed as it is in its many ways, I found it totally entertaining. I was looking forward to it dropping on Fridays. So, David, I’ll be curious to see what you make of it. Did you felt feel like you want to keep watching after one episode or no?


S7: Yeah. Also, you guys were so enthusiastic. I’ll keep watching. So thanks. All right. Goodbye. Slate plus.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for October 11th 2018 the angry mob edition.


S3: I’m David Plotz of Atlas Obscura. I am in a closet in Brooklyn.


S1: Emily Bazelon of the New York Times Magazine and John Dickerson of CBS This Morning. You are not in a closet. I don’t think where are you guys.


S4: We’re in a recording studio and we miss being with you I miss being with you on this week’s show.


S1: A terrifying Climate Change report casts a shadow on just about everything and puts everything in dismal perspective. Then Brett Kavanaugh is a Supreme Court justice. Democrats are angry mobs and men are an endangered species. We will discuss the the fallout from the cabinet confirmation and then has Taylor Swift turned the election to the Democrats. Apparently she has. Plus we will have cocktail chatter And don’t forget dear listeners we have our conundrum live show at NYU scribble Center on December 12th. Is it going to be a glorious night of confrontation with difficult ideas and difficult questions. And it’s always a really really fun evening and we’re expecting to have a great guest too so you should get your tickets now. There are just a few tickets left so please go get them at Slate dot com slash live to join us at the conundrum show on December 12th in Manhattan the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change a group of 91 scientists who have spent years studying thousands and thousands of studies about the effects of human activity on climate issued a terrifying report this week. The planet has warmed one point eight degrees already from pre-industrial levels and without massive change in policy the planet will warm to point seven degrees in a couple of decades from now possibly a lot more than that in the years to come after that. The IPCC concludes that this will be enormously painful not just for our children and our grandchildren but for us because by 2040 all coral reefs will be dead. There will be coastal inundation much worse storms and wildfires droughts flooding the spread of diseases tropical diseases to the north mass migration an enormous refugee flows from the tropics and there will be places many many places on earth where it will be extremely difficult to live. First significant parts of the year just you literally will die because it will be so hot and humid. These scientists say that this tragedy can be averted only with massive massive human action and massive changes to the economy the effective abolition of the use of coal which is now about 40 percent of energy provides about 40 percent of energy it would need to go down to about one to save 7 percent. A huge expansion in wind and solar power and massively impossibly high carbon taxes. Carbon taxes that are more than 100 times as much as the tax. The Obama administration proposed which got nowhere. So this was among the most dreadful pieces of news I think we’ve we’ve heard and we’ve talked a lot about how bad the news has been and how disruptive and how upsetting everything is. But this is upsetting at a global level. And why. Emily do you think it’s so hard for us to grapple with it.


S5: I mean the standard answer to that is that this is a long term problem and we are not well set up to think politically about massive collective action to solve something that is not an immediate emergency.


S6: The country isn’t set up for it. The world isn’t set up for it and individually the sort of human psychology doesn’t grapple with it very well it’s just easier not to think about it because it seems totally overwhelming and unsolvable. This report though injects a different kind of timeline into the equation. I mean I had never seen anyone talk about 2040 in these terms I’d never thought about this kind of dire consequence in my own lifetime. And I wonder if it could have the power to change how we think except that the immediate reaction to the report has not seemed to generate any of that. And we’re obviously still in this incredibly polarized moment in which unfortunately climate change like many other things has been a dividing line between Democrats and Republicans the United States and so it’s hard to see how this report sir mounts those divisions and yet of course this is all we’re absorbing this news as hurricane Michael is flooding Florida and we’re having yet another extreme weather event that is tied to warmer water and warmer air and the kind of energy that that generates. John what do you think.


S7: Well I think you’d say a lot of thoughts. I mean the first thing is is to recognize the distance between what this report says and what the administration’s Well what the president’s position is because of the distance between the president his administration as is what we were talking about briefly because they’re not exactly on the same page in every way. One of the things the only way the only ways you solve the collective action problem is that a leader looks at a big looks at the world and says this is a huge problem and we need to address it. And I’m going to use my you know leaders who we consider virtuous and who are doing the right thing say and I’m going to move my country in the direction of trying to solve this problem because that’s what I’m here to do. I’m not here to do small things I’m here to do big things and the only way this big thing can be done is with the blunt force of the president’s political power. So that’s what what. That’s one end of the scale of the way you may do this but if you look at the way President Trump has talked about climate change he is not only in specific terms said that it’s a hoax created by the Chinese to make the Chinese more competitive in the U.S. less competitive.


S8: But he has also consistently attacked the empirical well empirical reasoning or what some people would call the Enlightenment and the idea that people through expertise looking at data and looking at at what you can analyze come to a conclusion. He’s he’s got kind of a double blow here against this.


S4: There’s a there’s a real distance between what one would do and what this president is doing.


S9: I’ve reached the point in oddly this may be you know I may be totally wrong headed and this may be a bad conclusion to have reached but I’ve reached the point that this is a collective action problem which is actually insoluble that there is no possible way the world can can muster the political will and the sacrifice required to make the changes that are necessary that we will keep burning these fuels until it is cheaper not to. And therefore it cannot be a political solution we can’t look to politics to solve it. We can only look to science to solve it. That the only possible remedy is some incredible scientific breakthrough. Hopefully at the level of fuel that we figure out some way to create energy without damaging the planet at scale and in a very cheap way and we can apply that very very quickly which is a very far fetched hope or as a second much worse solution some form of geoengineering to try to to forestall the worst. To say we’re going to continue this terrible damage what we’re in try to forestall it by using some scientific method of throwing a bunch of crap into the atmosphere to to to help us.


S1: But I don’t think there is a political solution and I think the time and energy we spend seeking a political solution be better spent saying we need funding massive funding for our indeed massive funding for energy experimentation massive funded funding for ways to make alternative fuels cheaper and thus thus more attractive in the marketplace. The political will is not going to be there we’re not going to have five thousand dollar a tonne carbon taxes. It’s not going to happen. And therefore let’s look to the things that can happen which is possibly innovation and experimentation that make the markets work better. It’s not a hopeless am I am I wrong to give up on politics.


S5: I think you’re wrong. I mean we just the world signed the Paris climate treaty and when you look at the suggestions for you know a kind of gradually rising carbon tax which would make a huge difference if it was adopted on a large scale it’s a sensible measure like it’s it’s within reach in the US for sure. Yes I feel like those political solutions are entirely compatible and indeed necessary for the scientific innovation you’re talking about. You have to put pressure on prices in order to stimulate the kind of you know movement toward renewable fuels and alternatives that are have the potential to make a huge difference and hopefully save us.


S4: Yeah I think the question is are sensible measures possible in the current American political climate on this particular question where sensible is defined as the acts that you would take to ameliorate the effects of something that the current president doesn’t believe exists or that he believes in trying to combat will only hurt all of the constituencies he cares about. And we should also mention of course that the Koch brothers actively fund politicians who take positions in the opposite of the. Of any kind of collective action that would be taken and taken to ameliorate this. But I also am I do agree with Emily which is the the funding for innovation. Also politicians have to vote for that funding and they’re voting for that funding to go to other things at the moment.


S1: Right. But I guess I feel like that’s an easier get lift than than telling people that your your gas is going to cost eight times as much. What do you guys make of the the most persuasive conservative case I’ve ever heard around this.


S9: There for a while there was a conservative case like oh this isn’t really happening don’t worry about it now. The most persuasive case I ever read about it comes from Bjorn Lomborg the Scandinavian economist who argues Yeah this is gonna be terrible. It’s gonna be really bad. Everything’s going to melt it’s all the things that these scientist say is going to happen is going happen. But you know what’s worse is people living in poverty. It’s 300 million Chinese people who live as subsistence farmers rather than living in middle class lives. And that the low cost of energy low priced energy while it causes this tremendous damage the climate and damages is kind of uncertain and it certainly exacts a cost. It also lifts millions and millions of people around the world billions of people around the world and allows them to to get out of a quite terrible economic circumstances.


S5: I mean I. That is a compelling argument I would find it more compelling if indeed that’s where we heard expending all our extra energy costs instead of in the developed world in which we all have these very energy expensive habits that we don’t take a lot of responsibility for. Right. Like I don’t know exactly what the back of the envelope math is. But if you were going to apportion energy use so that it helped people rise out of poverty. But you took it away from people who are already well-off. That would be really different than how we’re spending energy now wouldn’t it.


S10: Yes it would. Yes yes. That’s like an. I think it’s hard.


S5: I mean what I just laid out is a politically impossible scenario to imagine that’s not going to happen.


S11: And so anyway yeah you know we will know in 2030 or 2040 whether these timelines are right or may we’ll know in 2025 if things keep moving if the time line keeps moving up faster. And I wonder if let’s say that all happens you know whether you know President Buchanan gets you know is at the bottom rung of the presidential ordering list because basically people said he didn’t do anything to avert the civil war. I wonder if the catastrophic outcomes that are predicted here are on the horizon the lack of leadership. Well it will be seen in those kinds of grave terms because there really is only the blunt force of the of the public leader can get either of the two solutions that we’ve discussed so far going.


S8: I mean either to move legislation towards pricing carbon or to change the funding so that you inject a lot of money into research laboratories but making coal plants fire up more and helping encourage the use of more coal is not really a solution in keeping with this report.


S1: Yeah well I think John actually there’s a there’s a canard at the initial just even in your premise which is that we already know I’m in New York today we’re all in New York today New York was inundated by Hurricane Sandy which caused billions of dollars in damage. There’s a huge number of people who transit between Brooklyn and Manhattan which is one of the the the most busy river crossings in the world who are about to be inconvenienced for a year because a subway tunnel was flooded. That needs to be repaired their life is going to be manifestly worse and hugely delayed because of this. So so the idea that we don’t already live with it we are living with it it just doesn’t. It’s not. You know that’s a tax that that all New Yorkers are about to bear.


S12: Yeah.


S5: I mean on the scale you know national scale but as part of your problem David exactly what you’re talking about that it’s there but we’ve accommodated it. It’s creeping up on us. Right. So we’re having these extreme weather events more people displaced subway tunnels closing rising sea levels. But it’s happening incrementally in a way that we then adjust to. I mean we haven’t even fixed the national insurance plan that means we rebuild in these coastal areas every time. I wonder if it’s just part of this sort of devilish nature of this particular threat in terms of our inability to really address it.


S1: Yes I mean I think that’s a great point Emily I mean we’ve sort of not at this in previous episodes but there’s a strong case that the entirety of the Syrian civil war and the cascade of of dire consequences that have arisen from it is it is a climate problem that that Syria has become intolerably hot.


S9: It’s too arid. Droughts that the life of that people were expecting to have the kind of middle class life they were spying to became unattainable and that radicalized people and that causes a civil war and that civil war then spills over in the form of refugee flows that cause a wave of right wing populism across Europe that fuels Brexit like that that itself is a is a problem which which is arguably a problem of climate change which we don’t look at as a problem of climate change. But it is. And and you’re right. And we attribute it to something else.


S1: And it makes it even harder to think about. That’s a great question. I have a I have a question for you guys. Which is what do you think it’s what’s our obligation or how do we teach our children about this. Do we teach them that your life is going to be horrible. You’re going to live in a you know rampant disease and a planet you can barely live on. Or do you say here’s a here’s a thing that’s going to be a shadow on your life. But you know your life. You can still have a great life. And and the most of life on earth is still really great.


S6: I mean we can’t do the former. Right. That’s just too discouraging and it’s not age appropriate for kids to feel like their lives are being choked off in that way. And you know there is some uncertainty and I don’t mean to turn myself into a climate skeptic by saying that but I don’t think that’s like a useful way for kids to think about this. I mean I also don’t think they should be dismissing it and ignoring it. So I think sometimes when I talk to my kids we talk about I like their generation is inheriting a lot of big problems. And that’s not fair. But it also means they’re gonna have huge opportunities to do things and solve them and like get out there and make the world a better place. And I feel like that’s something you know young people want to feel like they have agency and so that’s a way of kind of turning this question towards that. John what do you think.


S13: Well I I was thinking about it in two ways One is the next generation and one is the current generation again. Just briefly going back to what presidents do is presidents give people a place to put their anxieties and whether it’s you know I mean I even remember President Obama telling people how to wash their hands during the H1N1 Bird Flu H1N1. Thank you. So obviously that’s purely at the symbolic level but to the extent you have free floating anxiety about things it is a leader’s job to try to marshal energy into one productive direction. So that’s the question you’re asking about. And I agree with Emily. You can’t just save them. Okay


S8: kids hang it up it’s all darkness and terror in the future. But I do wonder how you then structure the argument for Hope which is that what is the structure that exists in that they can get become a part of that will improve things. You know my kids have encouraged us to put solar panels on on the roof. We ended up moving to a thing that doesn’t have.


S14: We currently run. You don’t own your building it hasn’t worked. Where we are now.


S8: But they were you know that was the equivalent of what seat belts were in our generation which is that you know kids encourage their parents to wear seat belts when they hadn’t been doing that before and then smoking for the next generation. We’ve got to do more than that can you. Can you create an argument for the hope that there is a structure to solve these kinds of problems given where the political structure is right now.


S1: You know here’s here’s the only hope that I can think of in that vein John which is that when we were kids they’re hung over all of us the shadow of the possibility of of apocalyptic nuclear war. And I know that many many children I was one of them went to bed every night and and catastrophe sized about nuclear war and what would happen in the event of nuclear war and imagining my own death in a nuclear war which I don’t.


S15: And it was serious scary right. Remember the day it was. Yes it’s like 11:00 at the right. Yes. That show like deeply affected me we talked about it in school the next day continue.


S16: So. So it was hugely affecting in the way that I feel that climate change will be for for my children and the children after them. It’s very hard to imagine that you can do about it. And yet what won that one won the day. It’s not that the risk of nuclear war has vanished is probably higher than it’s been in 20 years right now just because the world is so unsteady. It’s not that the risk of nuclear war vanished but it is the fact that through a very humane positive kind of liberal spread of liberal capitalism and liberal liberal ideas the West won and the kind of existential conflict between communism and the West vanished because we want it.


S17: And I don’t think we can win. We’re not going to win climate change in quite the same way. But what can happen is that if you say OK we’re committed to we’re committed to adjust world we’re committed to reducing our energy use we’re committed to going to sustainability the same way. It just just sort of say like we’re going to act as if our small actions are going to make a difference. It may be that in the end like that that creates political will around the globe. We’ve seen under Trump the fact that American that America’s stepped back from its ideals and that America no longer is a bastion of the ideals that’s originally been has has emboldened these right wing populist movements all over the world and has made a stand. I mean you see it with this murder of this Saudi Saudi journalists like where we’re sitting by and letting people get murdered in a way that we shouldn’t. But I think if we if we can get to a world where the right ideas continue to prosper it may be that we we make progress again on climate in the way that we. Because the right ideas prosper during the Cold War. We made progress on nuclear war. That’s my pipe dream.


S8: The only problem is that there was a consensus on both the left and the right that the threat of nuclear war had to be managed and there were differing wildly differing theories about how to do it. Between Carter and Reagan. But they both believed it needed to be done. And Reagan in fact after he was shot had a kind of vision of this being reducing nuclear weapons is being a signature vision for his presidency because of just the annihilate story power that you described David. And he committed himself to it. And while people will keep even well left and right didn’t like his methods. There was a consensus that the problem existed but this would be as if Reagan came in and said there is no threat from nuclear war and we need to build more more warheads not because you could argue build more warheads to to bankrupt the Soviets but that’s not there’s not an energy equivalent to that. I mean because essentially the president is arguing for a for policies that exacerbate the problem.


S18: And is there a problem too that you know for Reagan railing against the Evil Empire was like an exciting war like thing to do. Right.


S19: There is no human enemy in the same way here that you can claim that you’re defeating and take on the mantle of you know and fighting aggressive bring out all your weapons president.


S12: Right. And there’s also not an ideological cause here one of the things that was so helpful with disarmament or with the nuclear race is that it was the night it was still an ideological struggle between communist the Western freedom human rights and capitalism vs. collectivism and the subjugation of human rights and the lack of freedom in the Soviet Union. And you could bundle all of that together which you can’t in this way. Well you can’t in this case either. And there’s no star wars version you know if President Trump had a kind of I mean I guess carbon sequestration it would be the equivalent. But the president I don’t think he’s ever if he’s ever mentioned it. I don’t remember it. You know in other words there’s not that kind of pie in the sky solution. And I think also people would argue Star Wars actually was it was effective.


S15: But anyway the point is that there isn’t some like magic tool exciting bright shiny new object right.


S1: Same way that a politician could grab on to currently let’s and they’re depressingly oh no we solved that problem.


S18: Didn’t you notice.


S16: Yeah we did. Slate Plus members you get bonus segments on the Gabfest and other Slate podcasts and as part of your membership what you can get by going to slate that complex efforts plus you would hear today a segment we’re gonna do about the terror Westover book educated a wonderful book that all three of us have read in recent months. And we’re going to talk about that. So go to Slate dot com flushed f us plus and sign up today but cabinet with confirmed in a narrow vote and then sworn on to the Supreme Court in a ceremony at the White House. I could not bring myself to watch that ceremony at the White House because it seemed icky but in the weeks since. Since his confirmation that the story in politics has been about the effort by Republicans to turn Cavanaugh’s victory into not just a win of a Supreme Court seat and I would say the prize of a Supreme Court seat is worth an enormous amount of lost political capital. But there’s also tried to turn it into a political victory and something that will galvanize their voters and they’re doing this in part by depicting Democrats and cabinet supporters as an angry mob and depicting the charges against Kavanaugh the sexual assault assault charges allegations brought against him as a despicable hit job. So John as a political measure is this working is is that are we going to look back on the cabinet nomination and see something which in fact with galvanizing for Republican voters and useful for the 2018 midterms and or are we going to look back and see something which which help Democrats and also raised awareness of of sexual assault and the need to speak out about it.


S12: Well both of you have as you say or both. Is is possible. So I guess I would look at it or the questions I’m asking myself are are the following one is short term long term. So there does. There is both reporting and conversations I’ve had with people involved in Republican politics who definitely saw a bump in support among Republicans for candidates. Fundraising was up. There was a rallying effect not only to Kavanaugh in fact well beyond Kavanaugh but to the cultural questions. And we know that cultural issues fire people up more than hey we gave you tax cuts and its culture of grievance not culture of Hey we’re getting what we want. So the question then is does that change the grievance was these moralists on the left are denying us what we want which is the set of policies that Cabinet was going to vote for him on the court but but more directly and in your bones is kind of are they. Is this just the left being moralists and and they’re reminding us of all the things we don’t like about their values that there is real evidence that that was happening both that shows up in the numbers and anecdotally. Now the question is does that lie. How long is that last. Is it already through the news cycle. And then does the president.


S8: The president is going to stoke these fires from now until Election Day. So he has to and we’ve seen him do it on everything from the national anthem to policing policing and his 13. It’s always he’s always going to play the values card somewhere. And so this is this is a nice moment I think of for him politically I think two final things I would say one there. Bret Bret Stephens did write a piece in The New York Times that I thought offered up a possible Lane to how this might be a sustained moment which is that he said for the first time maybe the first time or first time in a long time he appreciated President Trump because here was this blunt powerful force punching and socking the know it all liberals in the nose and he’d like that. And so that is certainly what the president is it’s what he embodies. Could people rally to that idea. I don’t know. But it offered some kind of way in which you could take this moment and then say yeah I like this more broadly for the next thing. The second thing is if there was a benefit to the president well actually let’s forget the second thing because I’ve been talking too much.


S5: So I didn’t read Bret Stephens his column. Is he basically making the owning the Libs is the most important value he’d like the triumph here and worth everything else.


S20: No what he was saying essentially and he listed about eight different things is that he said that the left went so overboard on Kavanaugh that it started to display in big ways abetted by the kind of media circus that surrounded it display all of the things that he doesn’t like about the left and that because it was attached to this very morally charged issue. There was all the sanctimonious and sanctimonious ness on the left he doesn’t like and that really the only way to beat that back was if you have a big force on your side and that that was what he was grateful to have a President Trump for.


S18: Yeah I mean I guess there is some energy behind that and you’re right. The question is how lasting. I mean part of what we’re seeing in the polls is the polarization that often happens before an election right. People start paying more attention things tighten they realize what’s at stake and they go back to their own party or they get motivated to turn out when they were going to stay home.


S15: Exactly. Especially in midterm elections the dynamic you are just talking about is playing more important than what I was saying. It seems to me that looking at the individual races the one that’s most affected by this is the North Dakota Senate race where we see Heidi Heitkamp taking a nose the polls although Nate Silver also pointed out the North Dakota doesn’t get polled very much or very well and so it may be that the softness in her support was there all along. Or maybe it’s being exaggerated now. I find the month before an election to be such a frustrating time for trying to figure out what’s going on because it seems to bounce around in the media narrative you know which right now is this idea of like oh maybe Can I help the Republicans because that’s sort of counterintuitive and interesting. I just can’t tell how deep it goes and whether it’s there are the forces that are at play in fact are deeper. And then I’m also just fascinated by how the gender gap is going to play out because if Republican or independent women turn out and they do what they say they’re going to do in the polls then they should have the force to counter whatever white men are doing and coming home to the Republicans.


S20: The part of this also is the wish being the father of the thought which is that people like Mitch McConnell Hall are saying graves are saying oh this is giving us a big boost and a big injection in order to get people to say Oh I’ve gotten a boost I’ve been injected. So you know that’s a familiar game. Absolutely. And but I think where we’re the Liberals and the Democrats need some where they seem to need a moment is I we tried to book a Democrat on Face the Nation on Sunday after the cabinet confirmation we asked 20 Democratic senators none of them would show. And what’s that about. And I don’t know. I don’t quite know. I mean part could be like they do want to be associated with the loss could be they felt like maybe they did go overboard in the whole Michael of anarchy. You know Michael Abernathy turning this into a circus. They’re not responsible for Michael Abernathy. No but they oversight that they’re not responsible for him but they are responsible for the thing that they may agree had turned into a circus and therefore they didn’t want to be associated with the circus in its in its current moment. And so I don’t know. I mean these are those are two those two things are guesses. But what I would have would have guessed and it seems to me the Democrats need is some body some leader whoever that leader is to step forward and articulate what happened and how it should then be turned into effective action.


S18: Do they need to do that though or do they just need to change the subject and start talking about things like jobs and wage stagnation and policy or health care and Yeah yeah they just somebody needs to step on stage and say this weird this thing happened.


S20: Here’s how to think about it. Here’s how to think next. OK. And off we go. But who is you know that’s not really happening right.


S18: And who would that person be.


S19: I mean I guess it does seem to be the rule of thumb is that whenever elections turn more into being about a culture war that helps the Republicans. And then the question is how to diffuse that in the kind of way you’re suggesting John or just by like having a message that resonates. That is something different.


S15: I do think that this has been like a long for a lot of people like a kind of national nightmare with like a hangover attached to it and the people I will speak for myself I am eager to talk about other things in fact I can’t even believe I let a cabinet topic into the show this week. I’m so ready to move on.


S12: Well we should note that the the obviously the richness of the president talking about mobs when one of the things he’s been quite successful at doing is creating a mob mentality. The chance of lock her up. It was. It was means extraordinary that they were yelling lock her up about Dianne Feinstein and Hillary Clinton after Republicans successfully I think made the case for due process with their their Supreme Court.


S19: And didn’t if you think about using anger as a weapon to make another obvious point. Cabinet did exactly that in his testimony so did many Republicans like Lindsey Graham and rallying to his defense.


S1: Yeah. You know that only white men are allowed to be angry Emily.


S10: I really. You’ve been around long enough to understand that only white men get to express our agreement.


S15: Yeah. And I I thought I kind of knew that and now I feel like my nose is being rubbed in it more and more every day. I still like you guys.


S7: One interesting thing about the House Senate split is that Heidi Heitkamp is a perfect example as Emily pointed out. And the way this bounces in Senate races could be quite different than the way it bounces in House races because a lot of the districts that are up and that are really on the knife’s edge are ones in which you have big suburban voting populations where the women are not as enthused know may vote for the Democrat or may not turn out for the Republican.


S11: And so where the believing Dr. Ford or at least believing accusers is more of them is not something you have to defend in those districts.


S13: Whereas you know in North Dakota at least based on Jonathan Martin’s reporting both in the paper and on the daily you know there where he was running into a lot of people who were saying you know kind of not only pro Kavanaugh but kind of anti this idea that women needed that accusers needed to be automatically believed.


S15: Women are a problem. We are just a problem. Everyone be better off if we just went home and were quiet again.


S1: It’s why. Why do when we talk about the gender divide. We always talk about it as women supporting Democrats and fleeing Republicans. Why isn’t it the other way. To me the gender divide is there’s something really weird and wrong with men that they are so so conservative and so defensive. I guess they’re what you know the Republicans are protecting white privilege and the benefits of being a prosperous white white guy has offered for all these centuries. And so naturally white men tend to sort in that direction. But I guess what I’m saying is the gender divide. Let’s not talk about the gender divide as being something that’s about women. It’s about both groups. Sure.


S19: Good point.


S20: Just quickly either one of you. What do you make of think of the idea articulated both by Michael Abernathy and Eric Holder that that the Eric Holder said you know Michelle Obama’s head when they go low we go high. No that’s not right. That’s not right when they go low we kick them. I was talking to a Republican who said when he saw an avid party was just basically Donald Trump like a guy who who Democrats are angry at because he muddied up that Dr. Ford’s testimony but that haven’t and he could eat clearly say look at least I was out there fighting and then I’m out there fighting for us. And you know who else is out there fighting like this. And remember Donald Trump had an huge embarrassment a national. He was a national clown after the birther ism when you know when he was America’s chief birther and then President Obama released his birth certificate. You know that Donald Trump was a national punchline and he’s now the president. So in other words Avenida if he was seen to have had a problem here that doesn’t necessarily mean it’s the end of your career.


S1: I cannot stand the line ization of amnesty and the comparison to Trump and the idea that that’s the only way to fight. There are plenty of very aggressive very effective combative people on the left. I would say Elizabeth Warren is somebody who every time I hear Elizabeth Warren speak every time I listen to something she said or read something she’s written I’m impressed with how simultaneously aggressive and yet smart and she is. I don’t think the model has to be Donald Trump. You can be a tough minded opponent of what Trump is doing to the country without being exactly like him. And I think Democrats are deluding themselves if they think of a is the solution. The solution is not there. The solution is is someone probably a woman who is is very very tough but not a clown.


S19: That is the lesson from Italy and how Silvio Berlusconi was eventually defeated it wasn’t with another clown it was with someone who was like a sober sides policy wonk kind of candidate. And you know in order to believe the theory that Ivan Audie is like the Trump savior for the Democrats you have to want the Democrats to go off into conspiracy theory irrational land. I would prefer that not happen.


S16: Let us move on. Taylor Swift urged fans to vote in an American Music Awards speech then followed up with an Instagram post to 100 plus million followers urging them to vote to register to vote to go to vote out Oregon sign up to vote. And she herself said she would vote for Democratic candidates in Tennessee Phil Bredesen and Jim Cooper for the Senate and House. There has been since a real spike of registrations that vote dawg. The play she point her fans to on the order of 250000 registrants and she did it disproportionately young voters a lot in Tennessee. There is some ambiguity about whether she’s responsible for all of that. There’s the numbers that vote org tend to grow in general the deadlines to to register to vote were approaching and you’d expect a surge. But but I think almost everyone thinks that a significant chunk of that surge can be attributed to Swift. Meanwhile we have Kenya West wearing mega hats and dining at the White House and says he’s saying he loves Trump’s energy. So are swift and w the same. And is there their involvement in politics the same Emily.


S18: I mean they both have political views that they’re expressing. I think Taylor Swift is trying to energize people who might stay home and there is a constituency of people who it seems like she has helped to mobilize and she’s also talking about just like the idea of participating in the political process. Right. I mean I really love the Tracy Ellis Ross and some recent award ceremony was wearing a T-shirt that said I am a voter. And I think just the whole idea of making it seem like part of what you do is a natural act of citizenship United States is like you go to the polls regularly. Like that’s part of being an American. And we should all do it together and hold hands. I. I’m like desperate for that kind of engagement. Here is an idea along those lines which I’m pretty sure comes from my children which is like you know you can have Facebook or various social media platforms make something that you put on your back screen or like on the back of your profile photo like the rainbow flag at a moment where LGBTQ rights is in the news whatever like let’s have something like that for voting so that people identifying as voters on social media in a way that then like makes that the thing that you’re supposed to do it just like normalizes it and makes it seem appealing.


S21: John my sense is that Taylor Swift had a disproportionate impact because she’s white because a lot of people on the right secretly thought she was one of them or maybe not so secretly thought she was one of them. And she’s been very guarded about her views she’s never she’s never spoken out much politically I think a lot of people thought that was because she might be secretly quite conservative and so that it was that there was a surprise factor there to do. First of all do you think this to the amount of registration seem inordinate to you. And do you think that that anyone else could have had such an impact.


S8: I don’t know that anybody else could have had an impact. I mean part of the impact of course was bombed by bumped up by the fact that 18 states had some type of registration deadline on Tuesday. So there was a lot of including Tennessee. So there was a lot of you know there’s a lot of umph that came not just from her but it was a known. You know it’s a lot of fun. Now the thing is once you’re registered then are you actually going to go vote. And that kind of thing. So we’ll just we’ll just have to see. I’m I was actually surprised it was as big as it was as it was. Did that. Was that because people had a previous notion of what her views were. I don’t know. Probably more was just that she has this enormous hold over the culture. And people really listen. But what does that mean listening you know. And how many people who registered would not have otherwise have registered. And do they go to the polls. Yeah. And the big one and then of course is do they go to the polls usually when you pull out celebrities it doesn’t really matter except when you can get them to come to your rally. And then when they go to the rally you get the people who came to the rally just to see the celebrity and then you know you never let them go until you walk them to the polls basically. And that’s that didn’t happen here. On the other hand depending on the state you’re in there may you know they will seem to who the new registrants are and you know and if they can mobilize enough.


S12: It’s tricky in a nonpresidential you know maybe it’ll maybe it’ll maybe it’ll matter. One other thing is that voters who registered have to register in the right states and districts for it to matter. So you had to see is this fantasy will matter although Bredesen is now down by a lot. But we’ll see where things are in a week. But I like five. Yeah I guess I was thinking I was sorry I was thinking more of Heitkamp is down by 10. So yeah he’s down he’s down by in single digits.


S4: But anyway. So it just state that people have to register in the right places for it to matter.


S9: Republicans tend to be ambivalent about celebrities basically because there aren’t many celebrities who are conservative Democrats really do love them. But Trump is sort of the exception Trump desperately wants celebrities to support him.


S21: But of course they don’t and that it kind of drives him crazy and so whenever he finds one that does it he he gets very excited as with Kenya. I think one of the things that I find charming about Taylor Swift actually who I whose music I used to love and now I don’t like all her new music but whatever.


S9: But one of things I find her intensely charming about her is that she her story is in a sense the story of of America or story of women it’s that she she is sort of representing a rural ideal. Her music is a country it’s a very conservative genre. She’s living in Tennessee. She’s writing songs about boys and trucks and then she moves to New York and becomes a liberal separate and now now represents sort of all these urban urban culture as opposed to the rural culture that she built her career on. And so with her it’s dance music triumphing over country music.


S15: I’m not sure I really like that theory of America because it’s like country music can keep triumphing. But I take your point about Taylor Swift.


S9: I mean I would much rather at the country music triumph I would I would be thrilled if all she did was record country songs.


S19: But yeah I like her country songs. I was going to make a different sort of learning point based on reporting I did after the 2016 election which is when I was interviewing women who’d voted for Trump women who’d gone to college and lived in Pennsylvania. They were really pissed off at Katy Perry as the celebrity who’d come out for Hillary Clinton and just felt like Hey who do you think buys your music.


S5: And you know why are you telling me I’m wrong and why are you telling me what to do it all. So I wonder if it’s possible there could be a kind of backlash although on the other hand the fact that Swift wasn’t talking at all about Trump and was instead talking about the Senate and Congress could insulate her from having that unintended effect.


S12: And I was one when you were talking about putting voting up on your on your Facebook page I was thinking through what it means to essentially make registering to vote what is implicit in that is that you are a Democrat or that you are anti Trump but you know you shouldn’t churn should be about process and participation. But isn’t that what it’s coming. Isn’t that what it in some of these cases. That’s what it means. I mean that’s what everybody you’re hearing is hearing her say well because she endorsed Democrats right.


S19: I guess what I’m trying to do is separate them out a little bit. But you’re right.


S10: The way she dealt but also it’s attached. I mean everyone is hearing her say that even if she didn’t endorse a Democrat she just said vote that these days that actually does signal Democrat because well demagogues tend to do just fine when you young people to vote and young people are disproportionately liberal.


S9: And because the Republican Party has made this really conscious effort to limit voting across the board and make it more difficult for people to vote. So when you encourage people to vote it is in fact a political statement.


S5: And yet at the only time I think we need to hold onto the idea that voting is not a poll asking people to vote is not a partisan act it is about improving and strengthening the democracy no matter how you vote. I think that’s crucial to hang on to and all of this.


S21: The only celebrity I want to hear from now is the rock. I want the rock to come out and say something. I feel like the rock the rock could move mountains. That’s my hope.


S22: All right. We’ll see what happens David.


S9: You’re on your own but OK let us go to cocktail chatter. So I have some dire news to report. DFS listeners which as I was talking last week about my new Martini habit this martini habit has become very dangerous. So I may have to completely shift. I’ve I’ve now had like three martinis before dinner this past week and they’re so good.


S10: And wait it’s three on one day going to be Academy days. No. 3 and No 3. No I’m enjoying it so much. I’m worry about how much Miller I just need to get back before dinner.


S22: That is like good thing people have done for generations anyway. Sorry. If you want to beat yourself up about your one martini three nights in one week.


S9: Go ahead well then one of them I followed with a jello shot at the bar was that was apologizing for being late with my drink.


S14: I want to know all about this guy. It’s just chatter gab Deville gabfest listeners I’m shattering down my clock. I should mark this seriously.


S10: All right fine. John what’s your chatter.


S7: My chatter could be totally apocryphal and it’s so it’s so kind of sentimental that it probably is in this world of of falling shadows and coldness and darkness. But nevertheless it’s from I saw and I found it on Twitter too which is like another thing that does not recommend it. But it is a it’s a it’s any missed connections on Craigslist and you should just read it. You can find it on Uber facts dot com which is the site I don’t even know but it is about a chance meeting in 1972 from a Vietnam veteran and a woman who was having issues with her fiance say and how is this Vietnam vet says it changed his life. And so even if it is totally apocryphal and made up the the idea that somebody would put energy into trying to create this kind of story which is basically formed around the salvation and saving power of human connection even when it’s in short brief moments seems to me to be something that’s worthwhile even if you don’t even if the specific mis connection here is not it turns out not to be true love as what is your chatter.


S5: I was so heartened this morning by a project that just went up in the New York Times called this is 18 times sent photographers all over the world to take pictures of young women turning 18 and do interviews with them about their lives about their hopes their ambitions their fears for the world. It’s just amazing to see these totally varied people from all over the place at the cusp of adulthood thinking through what it means to be a girl kind of on the verge of womanhood right now. It was just the shot in the arm that I needed I recommended.


S1: I think NY Times dot com slash This is 18 my chatter also inspirational a book by a man named James must which I hope I’m pronouncing it right. It’s called a thousand books to read before you die. And I know you’re thinking No I’ve seen those thousand things before before dying before. I don’t want it. This is wonderful. He’s a a reader of such joy and buoyancy.


S17: He’s not one of these crabbed people lording it over you or condescending about how much more he knows than you or pedantic. He has compiled over nine hundred forty eight magnificent pages well illustrated great books of fiction and nonfiction the high and the low. There’s a Dan Brown book on there. My God the DaVinci Code is in there the familiar and the highly unfamiliar and he has a real knack for recognizing what in a book is wonderful it is about as good a bathroom book read as I can imagine it. It’s so much fun. He’s a he’s a spirit. You want to spend time with so please check out a thousand books to read before you die.


S18: David Plotz How many of your books have you already read.


S1: How many of those books if I already read a lot fewer than I thought I would probably bet 150 maybe.


S20: Is is it a book itself or is an article.


S4: It’s a book. It’s a book book about books. It’s a book about books. Yeah. All right. Says that make it thousand one.


S10: He didn’t say you have to read his book did he.


S20: But you won’t know how to read the other thousand without having read his How do you put that in the conundrum.


S10: Oh my God. Exactly. You done you’ve done. I want to talk about my martinis.


S14: I’d rather talk to you. I’m done with my nit pick. Let’s talk about Darrell West over his book educated.


S1: Also this week we have a great crop of listener chatters. You guys are tweeting them to us at Slate gab fest and some of you are putting me on Facebook at facebook icon’s lashed out fest where something you have found wonderful interesting and fascinating troubling. Something worthy of discussion when you’re having your seventh Martini with me. So Sarah and Eckhart via Facebook sent us a link to a really weird wonderful story in the Washington Post which is a story about some thieves who stole 7000 items from a Philadelphia museum and you’re like oh how can you steal 7000 items from a Philadelphia museum. Those 7000 items were living insects. They stole all these rare living insects from this museum which presumably these insects will then be passed on to collectors who like to own weird hissing cockroaches and find it hard to get them otherwise.


S21: And the idea that there’s this massive bug theft was totally weird and enthralling and I hope those thieves get caught or that they get bitten a lot if they get stung and bitten and and then return those insects to whence they came.


S3: That is our show for today. The Political Gabfest is produced by Joslyn Frank our researcher is Bridget Dunlap. You should follow us on Twitter at Slate gab fest and tweet some cocktail chatter at us. There’s a new head of Slate podcasting. Gabriel Roth congratulations. STEVE Look Ty heads off to a great new job at NBC and MSNBC. We wish him the best of luck and we welcome Gabe as our new overlord. Anything we can do to please you Gabe. We will do for Emily Bazelon and John Dickerson and David Plotz. Thanks for listening. Come to our conundrum show on December 12th in New York. Go to sleep that complex life for tickets.


S23: We will talk to you next week and we’ll see you when we do conundrums in December. Bye bye.


S1: Hello Slate Plus how are you today at Emily’s urging. We’re gonna talk about a book that all three of us have read. I think John read it first because he interviewed the author on his show at some point and then I read it after that. And now Emily has read it but called educated by Tara Westover Emily. Why did you want to talk about this today.


S5: This book really got me in such a good way. I had it for months because I know John recommended it and people gave it to me. I resist. This is embarrassing. I am an author of non-fiction. I actually resist reading non-fiction and I resist memoir and though just brief descriptions of this book didn’t appeal to me either it’s like about this girl growing up in Ennis survivalist family in Idaho it sounded kind of like weird and maybe a little lurid. It’s such a well written special special book Because Tara Westover is a beautiful writer and is incredibly honest. I mean I really felt like I hadn’t read that degree of honesty and perception about someone writing about their own family. I can’t remember the last time. So yeah.


S12: JOHN Yeah adding. Yeah yeah yeah yeah absolutely. And also part of I think one of the problems and one of the things I was the reason I was so pulled into the book and we interviewed her on CBS This Morning and then I talked to her for 45 minutes afterwards for our podcast is that the kind of quick and dirty is like I grew up in a survivalist kind of fundamentalist Mormon family and you kind of feel like you already know the story right. She escaped but the the the the writing is is so well done both in the structure of the book but then also the most interesting relationship is really with her brother and the and the carefully crafted view into a push pull relationship with somebody who is clearly abusive but to whom she was drawn both for it’s kind of more standard reasons and then also because of the religious upbringing that she was in and she took get took lots of chances lots of great description she happened to sort of I mean her father was ran a junkyard. So the images of playing during the day by running through all of this basically sharp twisted rusting metal was also great. The mountain is used I thought quite quite effectively Yeah. So it was a I agree it was cool to see the care in telling what was also then and then also her own extrication from that intellectually felt more universal than the spirit specificity of the story might suggest.


S21: Yeah I thought it was an amazing wonderful book. Everyone I know who’s read it feels this way. It’s so vivid and actually one of the things that I really loved about it is that she is not a journalist by training she isn’t a journalist at all but she she used journalistic techniques so so much of what’s interesting about the book is that kind of self fact checking wreck checking her recollection against those siblings and being honest about where they diverge is makes it all the more persuasive. The fact that there’s that there’s so much ambiguity in this in this post blast forward world where we know that that your perception of how something happened and how it did happen and what you hold from it is is very uncertain sometimes and there are certain facts that you know and certain things you don’t. That puts wonderful there’s actually just in that vein do you guys listen to the podcast.


S18: Heavyweight Oh my God I was just going to say and that reminds me of Jonathan Goldstein in heavy weight who’s always mining this territory right and which facts that are your sort of family or friend mythology are lost to time like I mean Jonathan figures out how to confirm them or you know reveal the truth sometimes. But the basic lesson of the show and this is true I think about Westover is telling of these incidents.


S6: David you’re right where she recounts what she remembers and then there’ll be a long footnote about how one of her brothers or one of her siblings had a different memory of it and she’s just literally not sure. And she writes about that and I think that heavy weight is the way it does an amazing job with that same kind of material and it makes you realize that that is true about our own lives.


S13: And that’s the that’s it feels universally universal about her description is that there’s a meta thing going on here too which is that the structure of the way she’s written it is crucial to one of the central themes in the book which is who is in control of your memory and your history and when people tell you when the word gaslighting is being used all the time these days. But there is a lot of gaslighting going on about you know so what is your actual truth when everybody around you is saying your truth is something different. How do you fact check that and how do you fact check it in a world where people have just the normal immutability of memory but also where people have real motivated reasoning and memory making all of which is not just about oh do we disagree about whether we had tomato sandwiches or not. It’s about whether your identity is something you have any control over which is acutely at issue in this piece in this book but also something for all of us to figure out when we figure out who we are and who gets to define who we are.


S9: Yeah I mean I would just say going back to the heavyweight point if this is a subject that interests you that this week’s episode of heavy weight which is about Rob Corddry the comedian who’s an old friend of Jonathan Goldstein is trying to figure out if he broke his arm as a child get to exactly. It gets to the motivated reasoning question it gets to your how your identity is shaped by your memories and by other people’s memories of you and how that fit how you fit into a social world based on what those memories are. It’s it’s great. I mean it’s not as good as this book but it’s it’s a fantastic episode.


S19: Also themes. I loved it and I’m particularly fascinated by narratives in a family where family members and especially siblings have deeply invested memories that are at odds with each other because it I mean this happens in.


S5: In that episode about Rob Corddry and even more so and educated that people basically like go to war over these things because it comes becomes core to their identity and how they see themselves and it can be a story about something that happened to you or can be your rendering of story that happened to someone else in your family because your understanding of that becomes like your role in the family. Anyway I think it’s all just fascinating stuff.


S21: All right. Check out educated definitely go read a wonderful book by Terry Westover goodbye Slate Plus.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your slate plus membership. Enjoy.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gaffes has for January 16th, 2020.


S3: If you want to put out addition to her and that sentence, a vague her could be Elizabeth Warren. It could be the ambassador to Ukraine.


S4: I am David Plotz of Atlas Obscura. Chortling. Snorting In New York. No, not New York. He’s in Florida is John DICKERSON of CBS 60 Minutes. Are you where are you? You’re in Florida, right?


S5: Hello. I’m in Florida.


S4: I’m at the Poynter Institute in St. Petersburg. That is great. And not chortling or snorkeling. Emily Bazelon of Yale and The New York Times.


S6: Dawdling, snorkeling. I like that verb. What would that be?


S7: Snort chuckle I don’t know. I guess it would be both a snort and a chuckle. It combined in one.


S8: And listeners, you can’t see this, but Emily has a sparkly top. And it’s it’s so exciting.


S9: It’s like we’re doing we’re doing the show at a at a gala or something because she’s not wearing it posed to picture this boring T-shirt. Just to take it with very sparkly.


S10: It’s like a dark grey T-shirt with a few flowery glitter things on it. Like, how long have you been a member of the Ice Capades?


S9: You know, I I kids, though, because it’s true that in the video it looks really exciting. I can’t even see it. I can’t even see it. Okay.


S11: On today’s gab fest, on today’s gabfest sparkles all around. The impeachment trial begins with the arrival of a remarkable new witness and his documentation.


S12: Lev Parnas. We will talk about that then. Sanders versus Warren, the spat that helps no one, but possibly Joe Biden and possibly Donald Trump. And then Bill Barr puts the screws to Apple to crack the security on a phone belonging to someone accused of terrorism or murder or accused of terrorism. Plus, we will have cocktail chatter. The House has chosen managers and sent the articles of impeachment to the Senate where a trial will begin in earnest next week. Although I guess technically maybe it’s already begun at the moment. It is unclear what the Republican caucus that controls the Senate is going to allow to happen during the trial. Whether or not they will allow witnesses to come to light this week is a rather chilling set of documents from Lev Pernice, the Rudy Giuliani sidekick associated with associated with Giuliani’s significant efforts in Ukraine to to get an investigation started of the Biden family and also indicted for a set of campaign finance misdeeds that are kind of adjacent to what we’re talking about with impeachment. So, Emily, what was what is it that Parness has done to shake up this impeachment situation, if anything? Maybe. I mean, it’s there’s a lot of information that’s come out. Does it does it fundamentally alter any of the narrative?


S13: Well, if you believe everything Parness says, he’s providing more evidence that Trump was following every step of what Giuliani was doing in Ukraine and trying to get the Ukrainians to cough up information about Joe and Hunter Biden. So there’s that. I mean, to me, the most explosive revelation was this idea that people were tracking the movements of the U.S. ambassador at the time, Marie Ivánovich.


S6: In this way, that comes across as super creepy in the tax. Now, this guy, Robert Hyde, a candidate for Congress in my own home state of Connecticut, he was the one who was doing the tracking. Of course, now he’s trying to say, oh, it was all in jest. This is like we should do a list of the times. People say they’re joking about something that seems creepy and deadly serious. This is just like such a motif of our time. But I would like to see that investigated because it just seems really unnerving and it shouldn’t be OK to have private actors sort of on behalf of the president. Who knows? Going around tracking the movements of an ambassador.


S14: Your point about injustice. Such a good one. Emily, we’ve seen that obviously with the right and the far right. The alright. The kind of white nationalist right use that jesty ness as a way of of floating ideas which are unacceptable, which they which which they can back off of. They can say, oh, we’re just kidding around, but then become actually. These ideas actually enter the the bloodstream of the whole country because then they they they do mean it. They do mean it, but they give themselves the out of oh it’s comic. And it’s not just that he was tracking her. I mean, he presumably he’s talking some trash and he maybe he doesn’t even you know, he doesn’t have the capacity says he does. But he’s talking about having her killed potentially the way the language is set up, it’s it’s ambiguous.


S4: It does suggest something more than just, oh, I’m tracking you. It’s going to take care of it. I’m going to take care of her. I mean, I want her out.


S15: And we should remember and connect this with the fact that the president said on his phone call with the president of Ukraine that some things were going to happen to her, which draw, which creates the unproved, but creates certainly the question raises the question of did he know what was going on?


S5: I mean, what’s what’s extraordinary about this, if you step back, is that basically U.S. foreign policy was was outsourced to like a crew of Jamarcus and hang abouts. I mean, there’s left you don’t use those words, don’t work that don’t work that that Jim Oak’s makes it sound funny.


S16: It’s not funny. It’s not funny.


S17: It’s like it’s like people who had no notes for sure. That’s for sure. Yes, I know.


S7: Exactly. And therefore, when you hand over brain surgery to your lawn doctor, it’s not it’s not what you do. That’s the point. And that you have somebody like, you know, Anne Marie Jovanovic, the Ukraine ambassador, and then all the others who have been a part of the investigation in the House, who’ve come forward, these people who’ve dedicated their careers to the service of the United States, replaced with, you know, Rudy Giuliani on what John Bolton called a drug deal. You’ve got live partners who’s snapping Instagram pictures all over the place and and talking about how he’s on a James Bond mission. Then you’ve got Robert Hyde, who is a former landscaper who has a crazy checkered past of confrontation and just total randomness, who then also seem to be kind of a rent seeker with of an office on Pennsylvania Avenue in the in the Trump administration. That those are the people to whom U.S. foreign policy was handed. And it wasn’t even U.S. foreign policy. It was this effort to get. One of the things that the House Intelligence Committee released this week were handwritten notes from the Ritz-Carlton in Vienna that Parnas had written about what he was supposedly up to. We don’t know. I don’t think we know the timeframe of when he wrote these notes. But the top note is basically to get the president of Ukraine to announce an investigation into Biden. Crucial word announce because the point it is alleged and there’s plenty of evidence of this. The point was not to get an investigation underway. The president of Ukraine promised the president that he would actually do that on their phone call. But the point was to get it announced so that it would have this political damage to Biden. And and providing one more piece of evidence in that story, I think is also a part of what Parness provided this week in the in the materials that were handed over. And we should probably explain why they were handed over. Emily, you may know the details of this better than I do.


S6: Well, hardness is under federal indictment and he’s trying to make a deal with the government. I mean, it seems like it’s pretty simple, right? Or is there.


S15: No, but the the house didn’t get the stuff until this week because DOJ was holding onto it. So this this came out this week because he petition to get his i-Pad and his other materials back. And that’s why that’s why the House now has it. They didn’t. They haven’t had it since the beginning.


S12: I want to make a couple of quick points on this. First of all, it is, I think, remarkable and unusual that Parness is deciding he wants to make a deal with the side that is investigating the president, even though those are federal prosecutors who work for the president. And that’s a interesting, bold bet that he’s making most of the people who have been put been squeezed in this investigation like Manafort. They have basically decided I’m going to keep my mouth shut largely. Michael Flynn, we see Michael Flynn backing off from anything, any cooperation with federal prosecutors because they they don’t want to get on the bad side of President Trump.


S17: This is the Michael Christie parlay that. Yes, that’s right. Michael Cohen, I think. Yeah. Michael Collins in prison. Michael Collins in prison, though, you know, I’m not sure this is the bet I would make if I were one of them.


S12: I might say I’m going to shut up and count on count on Trump protecting me because he’s got a lot of incentive to. But the other point I want to like using these terms like that, you know, that he is a. There is this kind of fourth rate hackish to all these people.


S14: But their behavior is mob behavior. This is mobster behavior. It’s it’s extortion. It’s threats. It’s tracking. It’s like it’s not that these are just bad diplomats. These are people who are behaving like criminals in a country environment. The American diplomatic environment is not you’re not supposed to behave like a criminal. That’s not what you supposed to do. You’re supposed to behave by certain set of rules. And the fact that they’re behaving like criminals.


S18: I find very scary.


S5: Anyway, just back to Parness quickly. I don’t know that he could do that. They could rely on the president because the president has said, I don’t know who this guy is.


S15: So maybe he read that and thought, I can’t rely on on, you know, a friendly hand up from the president of Pisco South.


S1: I mean, isn’t there another possibility for what they were doing with the Evanovich, which is that there’ve been various. Is it which it seems like part of the scheme is to make some money to use the corruption, to make Ukraine more corrupt to to cash in and Yovani, which was in the way of that.


S19: And there’s a way in which some of these recent communications read as if the quid pro quo or another quid pro quo was to trade dirt on the Bidens for getting rid of Ivana Vetch.


S20: And that seems like a plausible interpretation of what we’re seeing.


S21: Definitely. I think there’s a whole set of people. The president has his own interests, which are not particularly I think his interests are normally financially corrupt. But in this case, his interests are not really financially corrupt. But then there’s all these people and this is where like the Rick Perry stuff. All the stuff about that board in Ukraine energy board that people were trying to get on. It does have to do with with people who are trying to buck break in Ukraine. Emily, I want to ask you a question about whether this in any way changes the nature of the trial, because this is all stuff at the second or third degree to President Trump. Giuliani does say, I’m acting with President Trump’s knowledge and consent. That is a line in these party’s documents. But Trump is not part of any of these conversations directly. So is this even going to come up in the impeachment trial? And does it does it affect the narrative of what the impeachment trial is going to have?


S20: I think it puts more pressure on Republicans to allow the Senate to call witnesses.


S13: And I think it’s no more second or third order than a lot of the testimony that allowed Democrats in the House to connect the dots and implicate Trump in this pressure campaign or shakeout scheme or whatever you want to call it. Right. I mean, Parness is talking about Giuliani going off, calling Trump coming back.


S20: Reporting back the content of the phone call like he is one more witness who is one circle away from the president himself. And there is just a lot of damning evidence if you connect the dots. And this is like another piece of the puzzle, which certainly if the House had had if if parties had had access to these documents during the House investigation, they would have called them. So that suggests the Senate could and should also call him if they want to really get to the bottom of this, which, of course, is not Mitch McConnell’s interest. And so I assume they will not call him. I mean, Susan Collins made this kind of maybe she just didn’t know it was going on yesterday, but she said, well, the Dem if the Democrats if this was important, they should have called him.


S22: And then when faced with like, well, we didn’t know that he didn’t have the documents, she said, well, that’s your fault for not investigating properly.


S16: John, where do you think we stand on the process that the Senate impeachment trial is going to use? Dude, do people know what it is? It will. Are witnesses likely? Unlikely.


S5: Well, they haven’t determined that there’s some move among some senators to hear some witnesses, there’s some gamesmanship going on in which I believe Senator Cruz, who suggested, well, let’s offer a situation where each side can call witnesses. So if you want to call, John Bolton will call Hunter Biden.


S15: And so that I think is still being worked out. But it’s I think the start on Tuesday. I believe he’s locked in. And then we know from previous impeachments that senators have to sit tight.


S5: In other words, they have to say there they can’t look at their devices. They can only bring in reading material that’s relevant to the case if they want to pose questions. They do it through the chief justice. One of the things that will be, it seems to me actually quite when I talked to a senator about this months ago, the senator said he was there for the Clinton impeachment, said the biggest thing that colleagues were concerned about was the fact they’d have to sit there without connection to the rest of the world and for a protracted period of time for anybody and a attention shredded world just to sit still. It’s going to be just difficult on its own. And it also is going to be interesting because this will be you can’t throw up gorilla dust. I mean, you have to sit. And this is a slowing down of a process that has at various times been purposefully quickened by various people, often the president in order to kind of take attention off of the thing that’s being discussed in the moment. Everything in the way this is designed will counteract that or work against that. So that’ll be interesting. Of course, there will be people who will weigh in. So this is so boring. But I want to. There were a couple of things that are interesting to me that first of all, there are no handwritten notes from left Parness testifying to the president’s deep seated concern about corruption in Ukraine. And so, remember, that’s the that’s the argument for why he was so concerned about Ukraine. And so even though love Parnis is not in the first circle. It’s a it’s more evidence that the that the story being used to explain the president’s behavior has no foundation either in his personal inclinations or in the fact pattern. Secondly, the reason that people in the first story circle aren’t talking is because the president isn’t letting them, with the exception of John Bolton, which gets us to the question of whether McConnell will let him go forward. I also wonder whether, Emily, you have some thoughts about Giuliani in his letter, which is a part of the party’s documents, saying that he was acting on behalf of the president was very clear to say he was acting in a private capacity. What’s interesting, of course, is that he was acting in private capacity to get the president to launch an investigation or announced the launching of an investigation. So the topic of everything Giuliani was doing, you know, in a private capacity then became the topic, the conversation the president held in a public capacity, which is what this whole thing was about, which is whether he’s doing things for his private good, using his public powers. But I wonder for you, Emily, whether his insistence is in that letter that he was acting as his private lawyer says anything specific to you?


S13: Well, I think that Giuliani was trying to create some veneer of like attorney client privilege and other protections you have if you’re a lawyer on behalf of a client. And he knew he didn’t have an official government role. So this was the way to go about getting that.


S20: But it does create exactly the impression and not just impression, the reality of the sloshing between these two different guises of, you know, Trump personal benefit, Trump, president of the United States, supposedly looking out for our national security interests.


S12: Emily, where do you stand now? Week after we had this conversation on whether Democrats should or should not want witnesses in this trial? I understand the precedent is for witnesses, all impeachment trials. I’ve had them in some form either live or deposed. Do you think the Democrats should think that witnesses will help the case independent, whether they think like that the history demands that witnesses be called, huh?


S13: Interesting. I have. I feel clear. Unlike history demands, which I feel like. Yes. Call the witnesses. I think it’s important when, you know, I’m going to answer that. Even though you asked me, like, will it help the case?


S6: I think that the the test for the witnesses should be the same as at any trial. Is it relevant to the question at hand? So for me, the issue with calling Hunter Biden is, are you just calling Hunter Biden to put someone else on trial? Because that’s not the way it’s supposed to work. And that seems like it’s the Republicans aim in terms of whether it will help the case or not. I think John Bolton is the total wildcard. I feel like for the reasons we talked about last week, we have no idea what he’s really going to say. And for his book Sale Personal AIMS Reasons, it seems unlikely that he is just going to be some hero who comes through for the Democrats. So I think that’s like a hot potato. And, you know, if they were sure of what John Bolton would say, wouldn’t they just like opened a hearing tomorrow in the house and have him talk there?


S23: He might not show up for that.


S22: True, but like, why not? I mean, if they really wanted to put pressure on him, isn’t that like a perfectly acceptable way to do it?


S12: Yeah, John, you and I both covered the Clinton impeachment trial in 1998. You, like, really covered it. I kind of I kind of Bogalay covered it, but you really did cover it. You covered the heck out of that trial. We learned today that there the Senate is going to play a major new restrictions on press access during a trial can be harder to get in and out of the Senate chamber. You’re the reporters who want to talk to senators are going to be penned up. They will not be able to follow senators around the Capitol the way they usually are able to follow senators. And you mark my words, this is going to bleed into new rules generally about press behavior and access in the capital after this trial, I predict.


S4: But they don’t have any of this for the Clinton impeachment trial. And honestly, that Klint impeachment trial did kind of have a circus circus like circus like atmosphere. It was. It was. I’m not sure it was super edifying the way it was covered. But maybe that was because of the subject matter. Do you think this these restrictions on the press are going to significantly affect how people perceive it? The that the trial is seen in the world or not? Really?


S24: I don’t know. It depends.


S5: I mean, you know, they they say and then these rules are required and necessary because of what happened during the Kavanaugh confirmation and the confrontations in the hallway. And the which were both senators say actually scary and also politically scary because Jeff Flake was confronted in an elevator. And, you know, in a way that really put the question to him about his position and what Christine blousy Ford had had testified to. So they’re trying to cocoon themselves. What will the. And, of course, there’s I have some sympathy for that, which is that it was a bit of a circus back for Clinton, although the right, in my view, the right kind of circus. I mean, not a circus by today’s standards. There’s real benefit for patients.


S15: Hallway conversations with senators when these things are going on. But that isn’t what you get. What you’d get is you’d get massive scrums in which snatches of hallway conversation we could basically lead the news and and consume social media. And if I believe what I was saying earlier, which is there are benefits to making everybody sit slowly and be focused about what’s at stake here, about the specific evidence.


S5: But then also the larger question is whether the entire operation of the irregular channel of U.S. foreign policy was itself dangerous and is emblematic of a of a disordered presidency. And that that is something to to have a kind of up or down vote on, then that needs to be discussed and thought through in patient turnout ways.


S15: So if we if this is a serious business, I’m anything that makes it makes everybody focus on the serious business at hand is probably is probably a good idea.


S5: I have one quick question for Emily about witnesses. Does Ken Ken, the chief justice, rule under maintenance if let’s imagine they have this swap situation and then on to one call. Hunter Biden, could somebody object and say that’s not germane? And then would that be the chief justice’s call or does it does it all get decided by the Senate majority?


S22: The chief justice could make a ruling in such an instance and then a Senate majority could vote to overrule him. And one would imagine that given that Chief Justice Roberts is going to try really hard not to make rulings, because what’s the point?


S4: All right. Last point on this, which all raises the question time.


S12: Will it really? It’s just my own observation. I’m very disappointed that the Democrats did not appoint Justin Amash a MASH. I never been sure how to pronounce his name as a manager. So he is the one former Republican now who has come out in favor or voted for impeachment in the House. He is a very, very conservative, has nothing in common at all with the Democrats. But he believes for for quite good and conservative reasons that President Trump has committed impeachable offenses. And he’s a smart guy and he was not named one of the house managers, which I feel like is a it’s a bummer, the mistake. Instead, it’s just all Democrats. And it it does make it seem partisan. Any thoughts on that?


S13: I agree. I think that was the better move in terms of high mindedness, I imagine from the kind of real politic point of view.


S20: There was no way Nancy Pelosi was going to give one of those coveted spots to someone who’s not in her caucus. John, what do you think?


S15: I think you’re right. And also, she wants control, such as she can exercise it over the narrative and he’s, you know, on their side in some ways. But as David said, maybe not in others.


S5: And also, he’s there’s talk of him maybe even launching a presidential campaign. And he’s an independent actor, which can just muddy the if you’re if you’re thinking about this from the Democratic leaders perspective, it just muddies the news cycle. If you’ve got one, your impeachment and or zigging when you want everybody to be zagging.


S23: Slate Plus members, you get bonus segments on the gabfests lawlessly podcast. You go to slaked complex gabfests, plus sign up and become a member. Today we’re gonna talk about the politics of Mix It. We have not discussed the British royal family on this podcast for many a long year. Finally, finally, you’re going to get the royal content that you long deserve. If you’re a slate plus member, go to slate.com, slash DFS.


S14: Both Democrats held their final debate before the Iowa caucus, which will take place in early February. That leaves about three weeks of debate lessness, much of which will be dominated by the impeachment trial. The debate itself was pretty quiet and it was massively overshadowed by the progressive family squabble that erupted this last week between Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders about a conversation they had in December 2018. John, what was what was their fight about? What was the squabble? How do they know where to come from?


S9: How did start like you getting to this right now?


S24: In 2018, the two of them met together to talk about their joint ambitions to run for president in the course of that conversation. Elizabeth Warren is says that Bernie Sanders said that a woman can’t be elected president. It’s not exactly. He said she said, because the there are other people who anonymously testified to Sanders having said this. It was brought up in the debate. Sanders said he didn’t say it. Moran said he did, then kind of moved on from there. Regrettably, it and I’ll explain why I say regrettably, maybe later, but. And then after the debate. Elizabeth Warren, this was picked up on CNN microphone. They were hosting the debate. Warren said, essentially, you accused me of lying. Sanders said, let’s not do this here. You accuse me of lying. And then that kind of ended it there. And there’s been various press releases.


S5: There was a context for this is that the Sanders people in various places have been pushing on Warren a little bit more at a kind of low level talking points on the doorstep when you’re trying to convince Iowa voters kind of way. Bernie Sanders made a big thing about not attacking other candidates. He’s known Elizabeth Warren for 30 years, so they’re actual friends. And the big point here, of course, is, is this basement fight in the in the progressive clubhouse going to undermine the overall goal, which for progressives is destroying the what they call the corporate wing of the Democratic Party, and that all still remains to be seen.


S12: Emily, there’s this one telling statistic you see cited and there are different surveys around this, which is that an overwhelming majority of Democratic and independent voters say they will vote for a woman for president. In fact, they already proven it.


S14: They voted for Hillary Clinton overwhelmingly, but only a minority of them say they believe their neighbors feel that same enthusiasm. There should be a term maybe that term exists for this kind of prejudice by proxy or this kind of anticipatory prejudice or second degree, second degree sexism. But how are we supposed to think about that, that this belief that one’s own neighbors are more prejudiced and therefore you make a strategic decision to not support a candidate because you believe other people will not support that candidate?


S25: Yeah, this is so there’s so many strands of this at this particular moment. So one important thing to say is that when women run for other offices like Congress, they win at the same rate as men. At this point in history. So we do have lots of evidence that women can win. And I think that Warren’s best turn on the debate stage was when she pointed that out about herself and Amy Klobuchar, this question of whether in 2020 going up against Donald Trump after the defeat of Hillary Clinton. People are not going to be hesitant to vote for a woman.


S1: That’s like a really tricky question. I think there are a lot of women who worry that latent sexism could damage a female candidate. At the same time, just talking about it is creating a kind of perceived weakness, especially at a moment in which what Democrats care most about is electability. So there’s just this like kind of damned if you do, damned if you don’t. Right. Like, let’s imagine the best case scenario for this dinner that Bernie and Warren had. You could imagine and and Bernie said this, that he said, look, you know, Trump is going to use every weapon he can and with a woman, he’s going to use sexism.


S19: And and maybe Bernie made that seem like a problem, was adamant about that in a way that was frustrating to Warren, someone who her whole life has. Expectations is just kind of rolled up, Bursley is gone ahead and did whatever it was she wanted to do and didn’t like put her female identity, four-word didn’t deny it, but also didn’t lead with it. They’re not having any kind of like nuanced conversation about that now. Now they’re like accusing each other of calling each other liars, which is just not a word that is in the interests of Democrats to be throwing around right now. Like, I just think it diminishes both of them. I worry that this like real conversation about, you know, the potential for sexism to infect the election like I do. Given that Clinton not in popular vote count but intellectual college terms lost the election to Trump, you know, are people going to worry a little bit more than they would have otherwise? And does that is that a real issue like that? Seems like a perfectly fine conversation to have except you. If you’d start talking about it too much publicly, then you make it true. And I think that’s part of why Bernie was backing so far off of it on the debate stage in a way that actually I found irritating because it was like he sort of went too far. I feel irritated with both of them.


S5: So many questions to ask. What I want to know is what we’re actually talking about when we talk about this exchange. What is Elizabeth Warren, in other words? Is this a question about honesty? Is it a question about whether Bernie Sanders would be a sufficient advocate for women as president is separate, apart from everything you raised, Emily? What is the. That’s one of the things I would have loved to have been examined in the course of the actual debate, which is, you know, ask Elizabeth Warren, do you think, based on your conversation with Bernie Sanders, that he has some view about women that will somehow make him a worse advocate for their interests as president than you otherwise would have thought, or then you would be or something along night lines?


S19: Because I want to know what you like, what’s at stake and how could you really think about Bernie, right? Really?


S26: Well, exactly. And that would have kind of gotten to the heart of this. Also, honesty is a perfectly important question when it comes to presidents. I tend to have a more elastic view of honesty and its role in the job. But leaving that aside, however, I think some perspective is probably worth rolling in, which is we all I am certain I can say without fear of contradiction had been in conversations where we remember something differently than the other person. And so to put the weight of the world on and a highly fraught conversation, because you can imagine that was fraught because they both want to be president and their friends. And and also, as you both teed up, this is an interesting question about the country. And it’s not just about men and women. It’s about basically men and women in seven states against a president who is really unpredictable and plays on identity at the end, a kind of root level. And so thinking this through some people, pendent penalize you for even asking the questions. You were Emily even raising this, but thinking it through, as it seems to me, as he is in the interests of both the specific parties and the Democratic Party.


S18: Do you think that this dispute.


S14: Does it benefit any of the candidates? Is Biden sitting there rubbing his hands, gleefully rubbing his bald pate excitedly?


S25: Well, it’s great, because Donald Trump I mean, both because it’s a distraction and because now it’s like everybody calls everybody a liar. Excellent.


S1: I think it helps. BIDEN Yeah, I mean, marginally. I think it does. I don’t think it’s helping either Bernie or Warren. I mean, I guess your point about honesty, John. I just find it like disappointing.


S19: I don’t really think that either Warren or Bernie think the other one is to be distrusted on some deeper level. And it just seems like in any other situation you would give each other the benefit of the doubt, right? Lake? No. There’s no tape of this conversation. She heard more doubt than Bernie thinks he expressed. Now, they’re both in these like, you know, political boxes they’ve created where Warren saying like, look, club China. Amy and I are the ones with the winning record. And Biden saying like, it’s preposterous to question whether a woman could be elected in 2020.


S9: It’s not preposterous to question that.


S26: It seems to me that that if you’re Elizabeth Warren and you know, this is going to come up or you’re bringing in Sanders and you know, it’s going to come up, that it provides you a moment on the you’re at the center of the spotlight. Everybody’s paying attention for whatever good or bad reasons. And you have a chance to say exactly what you said. Emily, which is basically, look, I know what Bernie’s heart is. And despite this dispute, I know that he cares about women. But here’s the thing. When you don’t have health insurance, it doesn’t matter whether it’s a man or a woman who’s going to bring you health insurance when you have to when you can go to college and not have crippling debt for the rest of your life, it doesn’t matter if it’s a man.


S27: A woman who, in other words, used the moment in the sunlight, the moment when everybody’s looking to then sort of 30000 feet and make the articulate case for your campaign and then shows since this is a contest of who can beat Donald Trump in a general election, show that you have the skill to articulate the progressive values that everybody cares about and follows you and other Democrats who are worried about whether you’re going to be able to run in the general election. Show them you have all this amazing talent and skill. And basically it was this thing that’s kind of dribbled out and theater in politics is way over emphasized. But this was a moment which called for it. And I was struck that basically no one had the tools to milk it for for what it was worth in a purely political context.


S12: Jonathan, that is an excellent point. I actually brings me back to the the one thing that gives me pause about Warren, who I think has generally been a really interesting and and and theatrically excellent campaigner. And she’s engaged people and gotten great crowds and she’s done things that are visually exciting. But at at several big moments in this campaign. She has really done things which make you think you really botched it here, Elizabeth, with the DNA test. No one with Medicare for all, which I understand was a risk that she took. But, man, she she really, I think, put a pin in her campaign balloon with that one. And now here where there was an opportunity, I’m not sure it’s an opportunity. She saw it. I don’t know that it’s clear that she leaked this in order to get the story out.


S14: But whatever it is, she did not handle it in this spectacular way in your eye. And just to pile on to that, I find the oneness of this campaign, which is so important, bizarre, and in particular, the oneness and quietness of the Biden campaign. I can’t even remember a front runner presidential campaign that has been this uninteresting and this bad in my lifetime. It’s such a bad, boring campaign for Biden. And yet, what does it matter? Apparently, he’s still leading, huh?


S15: The use of the word one there was so perfect. I’m I’m I just want everyone to reflect on that.


S26: I’m barging in here, Emily, just because I think the the. I’d like to recommend as just a piece of smart, really smart analysis as reclines piece about Elizabeth Warren, which you’re here, brother. It is a it in part because I’ve been thinking about the presidency so much for the last year. It is the exact opposite of the theater review part. Now, the presidency requires both playing theater, but it also requires playing the inside game. What is the inside game? Part of what the Democratic debate about is about right now is what is the inside game look like? Joe Biden says inside games, this game in the Senate. I know how to negotiate. I can get people who are on the other side to work with me. Many people, including his former boss, Barack Obama, would say that system is broken. The partisanship is too calcified. No Republican senator can cross the aisle because they’ll get a primary. And Fox News will kill them operating then in the world as it is not the world as you’d like it to be. You need to be able to use the administrative state to achieve goals the Democrats have care about. In order to do so, you need to have a clear understanding of how that works and how to best maximize it. And Ezra Klein makes the case incredibly well for Elizabeth Warren, knowing better than perhaps any president, maybe since Hoover. A lot of good it did him. But how the administrative state works and how if you care about the balance of power system, this should horrify you. But nevertheless, if you boot, if you want to get something done, somebody who knows how to use the administrative state to get those things done at the executive level without having to bother with Congress, that Elizabeth Warren has the temperament, the skills, the focus is really basically tailor made for that job. And it’s a really it’s a really interesting argument to make and he makes it very well.


S25: One more thing before we go. I was looking back at my interview notes from talking to Warren when I was profiling her last spring. And I asked her at one point, like, is there any upside to running as a woman right now? And the first thing she said was it is what it is in this kind of like matter of fact way. And then she said, oh, yeah, of course, there’s an upside. It’s all those girls who I get to pinky promise with and say, this is what women do that they run for president. I think she genuinely like that is a real sense of inspiration.


S20: She has both in receiving it from the girls who she sees on the campaign trail and also in providing it.


S19: It just in some ways she is such a good person to have in this role, because I think for her whole career, she kind of surmounted barriers that women face without a whole lot of fuss. And there’s something to me that’s just a little surprising and odd that she’s now confronting this issue in such a public way. I think she was like avoiding making. An issue and now it seems a little bit like right before the voting, she realized in some way she was going to have to address this. And now it’s sort of upon us and I guess it just kind of wish it wasn’t.


S28: OK.


S12: Moving on, Emily, there is a showdown developing between Bill Barr, the attorney general, and his Department of Justice or our Department of Justice. I should say not his Department of Justice and Apple over access to phones owned by shooter and a shooting at a Pensacola Naval Air Station where a Saudi national who was stationed at this air station, he was injured. Down people hunting with the American military, murdered three people, was then himself killed in an assault recently in late 2019. So what is this showdown about?


S13: So the government has the phone of the shooter says it can’t figure out how to break the encryption and get in once Apple to do it. And Bill Barr, the attorney general, has used this to make a big kind of public stand against Apple and to call for help in this case and also for compliance with helping the government in other cases.


S25: I think this is one of those things where when you just think about the single instance, you come up with a different answer then when you take a step back. So if you’re just thinking like should the government be able to read this guy’s phone? They say they can’t do it. They have a warrant. Why shouldn’t Apple help? It seems like, OK, fine. But then if you think about it for two more minutes, what Apple is saying is if we provide the government help breaking into this phone, that means we can do it for other phones. That weakens the security system for all phones. And so you might, first of all, worry about the government seeking access to lots of phones. Do we really trust the Justice Department or law enforcement generally with that kind of power? And second, do we want to worry about weakening the privacy settings and security encryption services on devices generally by creating these kinds of backdoor keys? One thing I wonder about and I wonder how you guys feel is that I think these are both not entities I trust a whole lot like government, law enforcement. You worry about their overbearing surveillance desires. But then on the other hand, we have Apple big tech in general saying that they know best. And I feel like I’ve become very skeptical of their assurances on that score as well. And I wonder how this affects how you guys see this issue.


S23: Yeah, that’s that’s a great point.


S26: When you say they know best, Emily, even tell me exactly what you mean because you are. Wouldn’t the Apple position be? We don’t know best. Other than we know that the person you know, individual freedom, individual privacy is a principle we stand behind.


S15: And we don’t want to get in. We don’t want to kind of pretend we know best. But we know that at least one big thing and everything, you know, and and we’re making that one big decision, but we’re not going to try and manage every other little decision which seems different than the than what DOJ is saying, which is we have a system and a process to make sure we don’t go over the line here. So it feels maybe a little different between what the two of them were doing, which isn’t to undermine your general broad proposition, which is this is in the hands of two people who are two institutions that have their own interests, which are maybe different than the public. Good.


S8: Well, it is clear that the interests of Apple and the interest of the U.S. government are not necessarily interests of any individual person, the interest of society as a whole. That said, Apple does appear to be abiding by its legal obligations, so it’s provided access to the things it says it can provide access to. It’s, you know, complying with warrants. It doesn’t comply. And I think Apple’s position, as I understand it, is we do not have the capacity to break the encryption on this phone. We have not built the capacity to break the encryption on this phone. Now they know how to build that capacity, but they haven’t done it. And so it’s almost like a compelled speech issue, which is that can the U.S. Department of Justice compel Apple to develop two right. To create speech, to create a program to crack its own phones? Can they be forced to speak? And I would say no. That’s a like a pretty clear First Amendment case. You cannot be compelled to say things, do things to do work that you don’t want to do. If Congress wants to pass a law saying in the future, you cannot develop a phone that is not decrypted, all that any phone has to have a backdoor. Congress can do it that can be fought out, fought in the courts. But I don’t think as a matter of just sort of the Department of Justice today ordering Apple to do something or asking Apple do something carries that weight. It is not we have not legislated Congress saying every phone has to be decrypted, but we’ve not had that discussion. Apple has gone ahead and developed something because Apple believed it’s in the public interest. And Apple is saying, like, you want to. You want to decrypt it, find a way on your own. It’s that’s your problem. It’s not our problem. We’ve we’re providing a service. And if if Congress and the Supreme Court and the president want to change that, then they can try to pass a law that changes it. But I don’t. Think that that given the sort of landscape of law we have today. But Apple has any obligation that I think it would be against. I think it would. It would be it would be wrong for them to be forced to have to open this phone, even though it might well help in this investigation, although I also don’t even think I would help in this investigation like the guy is. He’s dead. The crime was committed. They will some investigating. There’s some investigatory gain perhaps to seeing what’s on this phone that they are not able to get access to through other sources. But when you go back and look at a lot of these kinds of cases, so much of what you can discover, so much of what you need to do is really just human intelligence. It’s different kinds of its work that you can you can get access to a lot of that information through other means other than the the kind of specific violation that the government’s asking to commit at that moment. So I also don’t even believe the government and they say this is the only way they can get access to the information they need.


S13: Yeah. That all makes a lot of sense. I mean, in addition to that, there are these two companies that have helped the government break into Apple phones previously. And it’s not clear like why that didn’t work this time. And the suspect, the shooter, shot one of the phones. Maybe that’s why they can’t get into it. It does seem like Barr may have kind of confected this as a way to rant against Apple. And I do wonder, because I feel deeply cynical about Barr and about Apple. If both sides are kind of using this for their own political purposes like this allows Bill Barr to rant against a technology company and then Apple gets to be the great protector of privacy.


S20: I mean, this is a kind of niche that Apple has carved out for itself. It’s different from Facebook and Google claiming to be really protective. So if you want to take the cynical view, there’s a lot of like posturing going on here.


S1: I guess one thing, David, when you imagine Congress potentially legislating to make it, you know, like illegal to have a phone that is truly encrypted, I mean, just posing it that way I think demonstrates what folly that would be like then it’s black market that you have a like everyone would want that phone anyway.


S25: It just we’re not going to have that piece of legislation, which I think proves your point.


S14: Right. I got a couple other points on this, which is so one of the claims made by the people who do say that there should be these backdoors into into phones and other encryption. Is that, well, the government will keep it safe. We’ll have procedures that’ll be locked down. And we just know that that’s so unlikely. What we’ve seen in the last decade or two decades is massive data breaches and things like that NSA. The NSA is own hacking tool, which is supposed to be so closely guarded, gets released in the wild and and causes mayhem all over the world. And and the idea that you can then trust if this technology is developed, you can trust it’s not going to fall into the wrong hands is it’s just folly. And especially if you think if if this is something which the U.S. government demands access to, but that that would affect phones that are sold in China, you know, that would the Chinese there’d be a massive Chinese espionage effort to get access to that that that program as well. So I just think it’s so hard to think that this is a protectable activity. I mean, you want to say like there should be no safe encryption in the world. Okay. We can try to say there’s no shabbiness, safe encryption, oral, but technology is not moving in that direction. And that’s a bad position for the U.S. government to hold.


S26: You know what I also wonder is, is way impossible to know. But the Trump Justice Department is making this case that they’ll know when to do the right thing and not the wrong thing in this case. But the president was elected, was elected. Well, separate apart from the reason that may have caused your your exclamation. The president was elected and has govern on the idea that basically the intelligence agencies don’t know what they’re doing. The Justice Department is wrong all the time. And what it does that the FISA court that and then in the course of the Russia investigation, the president’s defenders have and now with some with some married proved, it’s been proved that the FISA court that was overseeing the investigations into Carter Page and others operates, you know, can be manipulated by the FBI.


S5: And so what I wonder is the ability basically to the way in which the president and his administration have undermined for three years the foundation of the thing they’re trying now to build their argument with Apple on. So they’ve worked at their basically cross-purposes. And if that’s had any effect.


S29: Those are great questions.


S8: I want to end this with a totally logit ghoulish question. It’s an actual ghoulish question that I have, which I hope one of our listeners will answer for me.


S23: So one of the devices had a fingerprint. Could it be open with a fingerprint? I mean, we all have those on our phones or many of us do the they have the body of the killer. Like, why can’t they just take his body and stick his fingerprint on it and open the phone with that? Why? Can’t they do that? I would have thought that would be just open-and-shut, just grab the finger.


S30: Emily Todd, they already bury him. Maybe they don’t have the body anymore. I don’t know. Exuma it. Huh, that’s a good question. All right, let’s leave that to our listeners.


S17: Josh, so I asked to be warned. I don’t think Audi’s and you could heat up the finger then.


S21: Can someone please answer this question? It’s an invitation. Tweet that tweet to us at Atalay Gabfests or Facebook dot com. Plus, give us give us an answer.


S8: Let us go on to cocktail chatter.


S23: You’re thinking when you’re having a ghoulish, ghoulish thought, there is this there’s a cocktail, in fact, called these sour toe cocktail, which this calls to mind, which is a cocktail bar in Canada. I know, because we’ve written about it now, Obscura, which is you have a cocktail. But in the bottom of the glass is a amputated toe. And you drink the cocktail, you do not eat the toe.


S17: What? No. Yeah, it’s called the Doroshow cocktail.


S16: You drink it and you’re the toast that amputated toe touches your lips and then you you’re done with it.


S31: And then it’s the toe. It’s served to the next person. What a putinto. No. People send in their 20s. This is people send their people send in shows.


S8: They do. Absolutely. And what the reason they have people send in their 20s is that people occasionally accidentally swallow or maybe intentionally swallow the toe that’s in the cocktail. So they need to replenish it hot.


S32: This is not bullshit. This is 100 percent true. The sour toe cocktail. Emily is over.


S9: I really feel like we need to drop the mike and leave so much. I know more riveting than ducktales chatter. Andy, what is it? It’s actually about a cocktail. I’m not even sure we should do a cocktail chatter next. I know that. So forget it.


S27: The blast radius at the blast radius of the toe cocktail is reaches me all the way down here in St. Petersburg. What the hell do you mean? People send in their 20s. What do you print the U.P.S. packing label to send your tow to Shorties Bar? And what else do people send in?


S31: Yeah, it’s a new dawn. Search taxes. You Google like who needs a spare tow? Like what?


S11: It’s in the Yukon Territory in Dawson Dawson City. The first 20 is said to belong to a miner named Louis Leiken, who edits Frostbitten Appendage Amputated in the 1920s. He preserved in a jar of alcohol. In 1973, Yukon Local found the jar containing the terrible Şaban. He brought the tone of the Sour Dough Saloon and started putting it into drinks. Thus, the Sour Toe Cocktail Club was for the original tell lasted seven years because in 1980, someone swallowed it. Since then, seven more toes have been donated the bar.


S33: Toe number two, with given after an amputation due to an inoperable corn like her, number three, a victim across behind my toe, number three was also the number three was also accidentally swallowed.


S5: We are going to need a headlamp to get out of this conversation.


S30: What does it mean when we comments that anyone would put it anywhere near their face?


S33: Not number 8 arrived, 10 number 8 arrived in a jar of alcohol with the message don’t wear opento sandals while mowing the lawn.


S34: Oh, my God.


S27: So that means the person who was mowing their lawn, they had this in their consciousness. The person was mowing their lawn, had this sufficiently forward in their consciousness that when the moment happened, they quick like a bunny dick did what was necessary to preserve the toe for the purposes of spinning into the damp cocktail. This is we are screwed as a species.


S4: I actually find it very heartening myself.


S5: You have a very weird toe fetish.


S32: Go go to go to Obscura and look up the theradio cocktail jonge. You have an actual chatter.


S26: Oh my god. No, I am. I refuse to learn the grounds that it will seem pudi by result. No, I just you know, everybody. The last decade was the hottest decade on record. Just so you know. And any could very well have been the warmest period since the dawn of civilization.


S15: That can’t can’t tell because figuring ancient global temperatures from tree rings and ice cores and other things that they it’s not precise. But I’m one of the things that just I mean, this is, you know, there’s evidence like this comes out every week. But having just gone to Venice and done that story about sea level rise, I’m talking to geoscientists about the even if you do everything right today, which we’re not doing, the sea level rise wouldn’t plateau until the middle of next century. And so it’s just a you know, a huge problem. We’re where we are, which isn’t even really discussed much in them in, for example, this presidential campaign. And I just thought I would note that in my cocktail chatter, which is not as entertaining as yours, it wasn’t even my cocktail chatter that was just me noting in his cocktails.


S11: And that was me introducing my accounts that are just because I’m thinking about digits and like using digits for amputated digits for first other purposes. Emily, do you have a cocktail chatter either about a cocktail or about an amputated digit?


S22: No. And I feel like I also went in the direction of like big weighty topic. And I’m just gonna go for it because I so don’t want to compete with you. There’s this crazy to me story in The Washington Post this week about how you are now allowed to give more than half a million dollars each to support the re-election of Donald Trump. The figure in the piece is five hundred and eighty thousand dollars. That’s the amount. A single donor can give to the Republican National Committee that will go to fund Trump’s re-election. You could actually give as much as 1.6 million over the course of the four year election cycle. And this is like has to do with, you know, it goes back Citizens United, although it’s really a DC Circuit decision from 2014 that took Citizens United one step further.


S6: And it’s just amazing that we still have this like suppose it maximum of sixty fifty six hundred dollars that an individual can give to one person’s campaign. But through the national parties, through the PACs they set up, you can just get more than 100 times higher than that as a single donor.


S20: And I just feel like this is so much of what is wrong with American politics right now. And seeing it in those incredibly high numbers just really jumped out at me.


S12: I haven’t actual chatter, which I’ll do briefly. Also also serious. I really wasn’t planning to talk about authority cocktail. I just came up. Just want to refer people who are excellent piece and Emilie’s own New York Times called Who controls Trump’s environmental policy among 20 of the most powerful people in government. Environment jobs. Most have ties the fossil fuel industry or fought against the regulations they’re now supposed to enforce. It’s a it’s really interesting. It’s just photos and descriptions of the 20 most powerful people in environmental policy.


S14: And it’s amazing. It’s a murderer’s row of people whose previous jobs with literally opposing the mission of the department or the agency or the division they’re now overseeing. You literally like if you’ve gone out and look for the person who’d be most opposed to doing the thing this agency is supposed to do. They’ve found that person. And put them in charge of it. It’s it’s astonishing and going to this point that is in that Elizabeth Warren makes it is in the Ezra Klein piece that John talked about, that personnel is policy that we have. I think when we look back on the Trump presidency, one of the things that will be evident is that environmental policy was one of the most effective areas of change because it was where he and the conservative movement aligned. And he really put in people who have have very aggressively changed how we think about environmental policy, environmental law, environmental regulations in a way that that it puts it in a funhouse mirror.


S21: It’s exactly opposite of what it used to be. So check out this Times story. We also have great listener chatters as ever. Tweet your listener child to us at Slate Gabfest. And this week, Paul haibane at P Hyping sends over this very nice story in the Atlantic headlined The Boys Who Wear Shorts All Winter. It’s about why there is this category of boys, mostly teenagers, young teenagers who wear shorts through the coldest months of the year in cold states and tries to explain why they might do it. And if it’s a very charming story.


S14: And as somebody who when I went to school in England, which is not the coldest climb in the world, but it would get subfreezing as a when you’re below a certain age, when you’re below eleven years old and a lot of British schools, you wear shorts. It’s part of the uniform all through the year. So I used to wear shorts every day of the year to school. And it was funny to wear shorts every day, like when it was snowing out. You’d be wearing shorts, but it wasn’t it wasn’t particularly bothersome. I think I could wear shorts every day. I think I’d be OK.


S30: I knew people who died in college and I thought it was weird.


S14: Yeah, it is a little weird, but I bet people at UVA wear it. Do it.


S6: Yeah, it’s weird, John, to spruce that sartorial choice.


S23: If they were if they were well-tailored shorts, John might have like a slight, slight sympathy for it and not probably.


S3: That is our show for today. The guy that is produced by John Frank, who was here with me in Washington. She’s giving a big upside through the glass. Hello, John. It’s nice to have you. And our researcher is Bridget Dunlop, who’s not here in Chicago, who helped to Bridget Donovan down here at Poynter.


S35: Help me with two. It’s a two Bridget show. Bridget, Dalia and I know it’s Ricciardone. We’ve got a double, but a double Bridget and also Jessie Navarro helped as well. So thanks to them both.


S17: And Ryan MacAvoy and Natalie is here with me.


S3: Gasping Follow us on Twitter at Slate Gabfests. Tweet your chatter to us. Therefore, Emily Bazelon and John DICKERSON and David Plotz. Thanks for listening. Talk to you next week.


S28: Hello. Slate plus. How are you? So were you were late to this game?


S11: We’re late to like a century late to this game, arguably, arguably two hundred and fifty four years late or however many years since since 1776. How many years is it? 244 years.


S14: So the flight of the Sussex is from the UK. It’s been the big story in In Brake’s. It’s tarde, Great Britain, United Kingdom. Recently you have Prince Harry and Meghan Markle. I know what her name is now. Meghan Suffix.


S6: They just get called Harry and Meghan. I don’t think they have a last name. Exactly.


S17: Really? Like when you said the Sussex says I don’t even think that’s correct. And I continue on Windsor. Wrong. He’s a Windsor, isn’t he a Windsor? I don’t I don’t know. That’s a good question. Tell us royals. What’s their. You need to know royals.


S21: So they have decided to, in some fashion, step back from their responsibilities and to move where they live, possibly to split their time between the UK and Canada, possibly just Canada. Possibly they’re going to go to the south toe cocktail bar and just live there and drink xyloto cocktails all day long. So, yeah, I mean, it’s not there’s not a super political story, but there are political elements to it. I have various thoughts, but I’m going to throw to one of you. Do any of you have anything you want to start saying that is that is relevant to this?


S25: I have two things to say. One is utterly trivial. And what is perhaps more substantive might trivial comment is that there residents in Britain is called Frogh More Cottage, and that is just such a delightful name.


S30: And the picture of it is great. I don’t want to get into the millions of dollars spent on the renovations, but if I got to live in a place that looked like that called Frogged Marcott, it I think you’d be hard to leave it like that.


S17: Those cottages in Newports. It’s like a bit which are where it’s a mansion. Yeah, it’s exactly like a cottage on the beach. It wasn’t Pogmore College and it’s not in Wind in the Willows. I feel like Broadmoor College is probably the name of the house in winter and maybe out of Mars you are arrested.


S36: You no more you’d be for you’d be frogmarched near mine and you’d be frogmarched out of frog more on a more substance. And if you were running a political. I am all right. Are you stuck now by stepping on your yaupon like four times in a row?


S9: Do you want to keep going?


S11: Just just finish it out now.


S5: And if you were running a political campaign, if you were running a political campaign just finished, maybe you’re running a political campaign to have more incarcerations of people who lived in Frogh more you’d call for more frog marching out of frog more.


S32: That was bad. That was bad.


S17: The frog marching with good frog.


S9: All right.


S31: Under my son’s point, everyone’s so eager to hear the paparazzi really sucks for these people.


S30: And like, Harry had to watch his mom basically get run off the road and die because of this Princess Diana.


S25: And also the evidence of, you know, racism in the way that Meghan has been treated by the paparazzi seems really pretty evident. I can’t remember. But someone put together this like comparison at BuzzFeed. Twenty headlines about what’s your name? Kate Middleton. She’s.


S17: Yeah. Oh, apparently. Yeah. At BuzzFeed. BuzzFeed.


S1: I looked at that Kate versus Meghan and it was really upsetting and glaring. And it just makes you think that like. Yeah, Harry and Megan feel like they this is a life that is really costly. And it’s ironic that they are so popular in such an asset for the family and yet are being treated so terribly. It’s a real thing that cost. Right.


S25: It’s not like, oh, you know, once in a while someone makes you sit for an interview. It’s having cameras shoved in your face and follow you around in this regular way. And you’re supposed to in some ways feed the beast for the sake of the celebrity of the family. So I say I get it like I get why they want to get out of there for at least part of the year.


S15: One of the things that interests me about exactly what you said, Emily, is that is the extent to which they are a membrane that takes on the toxicity of the culture at the moment, at least. I’m just basically deriving this from those headlines that BuzzFeed put together and the other reports that she is just she is treated differently. And the royal family. I think the point in some instances and the reason you’re supposed to stick with it, regardless of the of the pain that sometimes comes with it, is that as that the ceremonial office gives people in the UK a kind of constant thing of stability in their changing times. And so that it’s it’s rock solid ness gives people kind of hope. But in this case, you see the way in which the kind of reverse has happened, that the culture at the moment has infected the royals to the point where. They just got a bolt. And I feel like somebody with a lot more skill could write a great 12000 word piece about how this is happening all over in cultures and in norms and standards and traditions and figure out whatever the three root causes are, one of which I don’t know. I was going to make a joke, but I’ll have to stop there.


S4: The boat’s not minutes. It’s it’s much different in scale and importance than what happened with the last pope.


S14: But you had a pope. Of course, there had been a pope who who’d retired and what, hundreds of years, right? A thousand years. I mean, enormous span where popes had served out their life as as pontiff. And you had Pope Benedict, who, of course, resigned and still lives. And, you know, life of retirement elsewhere. And what Mary and Meghan are doing is, you know, a small caliber version of that. I I this whenever whenever a big story about the royal family comes up, there’s always those people who are like, they’re so stupid, it’s so silly. And I just want to align myself with sort of what John was getting out a minute ago. I think people are absolutely delusional. I think the monarchy is anything but a net good for the United Kingdom. It is a myth. It is. Economically. Yes. It is a cost that British taxpayers pay money to the royal family. That is true. They do pay. They subsidize them. But the amount of tourism, the amount of of economic activity just generated by them and what they’re doing is enormous. And I’m sure as multiples of what the cost is. And I think it has a real super value in reducing it reduces the need for charisma and politicians that one of the things that we suffer from in the United States is this. We put on our Paul political figures this responsibility not only to be great leaders of of us from a political perspective and from policy perspective and legislatively, but also that they need to have. They need to be the charismatic face of the nation. And sometimes you get and I think with the Obama family, you’ve got this time’s 20 like a blessing. Who knew? Because they’re so charismatic and good-Looking and dynamic. And they as representatives of the United States, it was it was brilliant. But then sometimes you get people who are bad at it. And it’s just the expectation that a politician embody the the nation. Seems to me a misguided expectation that the ceremonial work of the of the politics should be done by somebody who is not in politics. It just should be done by some ceremonial figure in the British. Have this these people who are very good at it. They do it respectably. They open you know, they cut ribbons really well. They they throw champagne bottles at ships really well. And it creates this. As John said, it creates this continuity in this conservative culture, which is good in radical and dangerous times. I even though, as you say, it’s like they’ve been it’s the royal family been infected by the bad tenor of the moment. I I still think it’s a stabilizing force compared to what we get in countries without royal families.


S15: Plus are super entertaining and they have nice hats by Slate Plus.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your slate plus membership. Enjoy.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for December 19th twenty nineteen, read my letter, Ed.. I am David Plott Battle Obscura. So happy. Me, John and Emily. That is John DICKERSON of CBS 60 Minutes and Emily Bazelon of Yale University Law School and The New York Times Magazine.


S3: We are all together. We are gathered in Skyline Studios in Oakland, California. Hello. It’s so nice to be with you.


S4: You are so lucky. I love it. I know. It’s really we should do it anyway. Yes, it’s wonderful. So we should seek to make this happen more.


S5: Absolutely. We are together on Wednesday and it’s Wednesday afternoon Eastern. And so the House is still debating the articles of impeachment that they’re considering for the president. So by the time you listen to this, the House may have impeach. The president probably will have impeach the president.


S6: You’ll know the vote count. Joe?


S7: Yeah, we don’t know the vote count because we’re preparing before we have a live show in Oakland tonight. So just heads up that we are talking about events that are ongoing for us, but are history for you. On today’s gabfest, the House impeaches the president. Then what is with the young left’s deep, deep unhappiness with Mayor Pete Boobage Edge? And then what were the most important stories of the year? Actually, we went back and looked and thought about what really happened in 2019 that mattered. And we will tell you what really mattered. We will. Emily’s nodding. We’re gonna do it. Yeah. Plus, we’ll have cocktail chatter. As I said, we’re taping as the impeachment debate is happening. The president will almost certainly be impeached by the end of Wednesday, only the third time in American history that will have happened. Fun fact if you had a baby. On the day Bill Clinton was impeached. Today is the day that that baby would be able to drink legally.


S6: Wow. Turned 21. That turned 21 on 21 December 19th, 1998.


S7: President Clinton was impeached. And December 18th, President Trump will be impeached. But December 19th, when you listen to this. Right. When he. First birthday.


S1: Yeah. Excellent. So there’s something about the pre-Christmas rush that gets the impeachment forces moving.


S8: Yeah. Why would I start with that?


S7: Why did they. Why are they rushing this through before Christmas?


S9: Well, I have very mixed feelings about the rushing part. And what I mean by that is that the Democrats obviously decided to go ahead based on the evidence they have on and exclusively on the grounds of Trump’s conduct regarding Ukraine. The other choice was to leave this open, see what various court proceedings down the line might bring in terms of additional witness testimony. And then separately from that is this question of having decided to concentrate only on these two articles that are Ukraine related. I think the problem with having held impeachment open was that it would have meant if nothing dramatic emerged in the next several months, then they would just have sort of petered out and the energy behind impeachment would dissipate. But it it does feel like they really narrowed these grounds down a lot.


S10: Yeah. I wonder if a middle ground could have been could have been reached to achieve the various objectives Democrats were trying to achieve, which is go through the impeachment process, which which surfaced a lot of kind of just the facts, ma’am, testimony about all of the issues, but not enough. Ambassador Bolton didn’t testify. Mick Mulvaney didn’t testify because the president did not want them to testify. And in Bolton’s case, he was going to fight it if it went to the courts. So they made a decision not to wait till the courts decide because that would have taken forever. Could you, Emily, have decided if you were the Democrats, we will impeach on this, but then say we can’t. We’re not going to take. We’re not going to send it to the Senate because we were blocked by the president and not allowed to have these people test.


S5: Can I say. Answer that. Yes. Well, that is certainly there. There are members of the Democratic left in the House that are proposing that that these articles, impeachment of the impeached impeachment articles, which will be approved, not get sent to the Senate. So no trial starts. Yes. I think that looks that looks weaselly and weird.


S6: You don’t have the curtain Kerger convictions and they’re not going to get a better deal like the Senate on his defense.


S1: Right. It means like we’ve just impugned you and you don’t get to go back.


S6: It looks right. It looks very unfair. Yeah, procedurally due process. And plus, I keep coming back.


S3: So also, it leaves this thing hanging out unresolved and the polling is not changing in anyone’s favor.


S6: And I think I come back to. Sure, that’s true. Oh, good. Get to that in a second.


S3: But but but before you get to that guess, I want to come back to a point that I think you made last week, John, which was just that you don’t need to investigate and impeach and try him. For his outrageousness and his misbehavior to be in front of the voters, we’re all pretty sure that he’s not going to be removed from office before the election. He may be removed by losing the election. He’s not going to be removed by conviction from the Senate. That is fairly clear now. And and so you. The point is to keep attention on him. And if you’re if you’re trying to get political gain for your Democrat, it’s to have president’s wrongdoing exposed to the American public, because they’re not going to get that. They’re not gonna get this legislative impeachment solution. They’re only going to get sort of a public solution by the election. And Trump does, as you pointed out, Trump does such a good job of of kind of creating outrage and drawing attention to himself. And he will be doing that in March and April and May and June and October. And they don’t need an investigation that’s held open for that to happen.


S11: And no amount of evidence is going to change anything in the Senate. So if you waited for Boldon or Mulvany or something, it wouldn’t change. It wouldn’t change the nature of the dynamic in the Senate anyway. So. So why wait?


S1: I’m also deeply skeptical that we would really hear from Mulvaney and Bolton before the election, because what has to happen is that trumps this initial posture of blanket immunity. I don’t have to let anyone these like really unlikely and extreme claims he’s making for executive privilege that needs to get litigated through the Supreme Court. And then it comes back, assuming the court does inside with him, which like I’m pretty sure that those extreme claims would not win out. But then it comes back and you have to negotiate all the specifics. And for sure, some of these communications are going to be protected by executive privilege. It doesn’t have zero executive privilege. And that could turn into this long. Yeah, I feel really, really uncertain that we would have gotten any court based resolution before November.


S7: All right. Let’s. I want to actually go to John’s polling point. So I noted I saw on Twitter somebody else said this. So if I’m wrong, blame Twitter that when President Clinton was impeached in 1998, his approval rating was at its highest point ever. It was at 73 percent.


S4: No, isn’t that amazing? Yes, Chris, that is not true today. It is not true today. And what’s amazing, although. Well, OK, is that a sympathy approval rating?


S10: Well, I haven’t I haven’t looked at the trend. I mean, so first of all, it’s amazing any president serious would ever have an approval rating. I mean, Eisenhower didn’t. So what we think of our modern age of partisanship.


S6: But but George W. Bush had the post 9/11, George W. Bush and the Iraq war special case.


S10: There was no war that that Clinton was coming back from. There was no rallying around the flag for national security emergency in glutens case. But I was I had to double check that figure when I came across it. That’s not the case with Donald Trump. His his numbers have not massively cratered, but that’s been true of all the things that have challenged his numbers. So they are still historically bad for an approval rating. I think his net favorable is at negative 14.


S1: In the last poll, I saw that his approval is generally in the low 40s, right?


S10: Mid for low, mid 40s. What I was interested in is the Washington Post poll that had a question about should the president should his. Should he let his people testify? And sixty four percent of Republicans said, yes, they should let them testify. I thought, wow, that’s really high for Republicans. And then. And so I posted that on on the Twitter machine. And Chris Hayes pointed out that that’s probably very likely that there are a number that Republicans who think he should let them testify because it will be exculpatory. And I went looked inside the post numbers and indeed, the two segments he would that are most pro-Trump in that are conservatives, self-identified conservatives and white non-college. And those are the two groups with who have the highest percentage in the close to 70 percent who want the aides to testify. So it’s a reminder that numbers don’t always show you what they write.


S7: I mean, they’re not.


S10: So that the implication of that is what is that that those who are most in support of Donald Trump, who most think it’s wrong for him to be impeached, want. Mulvaney and Bolten to testify because they think they will get up on the stand and say the president did nothing wrong.


S1: I wonder what they make of the fact that it is, in fact, the president who is blocking their testimony. Perhaps that reality hasn’t quite sunk in. I don’t know.


S10: I don’t know. Not there. But I think it’s still the case that a majority of the country hour a plurality excuse me, a plurality is in favor of impeachment. It’s not by a huge margin, but it’s still a plurality. Emily, not the case in Clinton’s case at all.


S7: Emily, the Senate trial we’re getting sniffs about what it’s gonna be and it is clearly shaping up to be brief and superficial. Mitch McConnell has said it’s gonna be fast. It’s gonna be in January. There will not be witnesses or maybe he hasn’t said that. But that’s the word that leaks out of the McConnell camp. Republicans have rejected Minority Leader Schumer’s proposal that witnesses be called politically Mulvaney and Bolton and a couple of their aides. They won’t have heard from the key people. So it is a truism that it can’t be good for everybody. For the trial to be short and without evidence. But I’m not sure that it’s actually better for Republicans and Democrats that the trial be shorter, may be good for Democrats. Maybe that McConnell is in fact, making a bad choice. If his goal is to advance the political.


S1: And why is it bad for Democrats? Because it was long.


S6: It would seem more distracting and would seem more of a drag.


S5: And yet it would just it wouldn’t they wouldn’t still wouldn’t win at the end. It would be distracting and be confusing. The public is kind of like, let’s keep going forward.


S10: Right. And there would be no new fact. So it would just be like constipation for months.


S1: Well, also, there is this specter of calling Joe Biden or Hunter Biden and trying to basically turn the tables and make this proceeding about their wrongdoing alleged. And McConnell does not seem to be planning on that. Yeah, I think McConnell is making the safe choice, the kind of long odds choice. I would do it. He was doing if I was him, because you just if you let it mushroom, you don’t. You could lose control over it pretty quickly. He does have to get 51 votes to approve calling witnesses. I assume that’s not going to be a problem for him and that people are basically going to go along. There are some interesting to prove Domme calling witnesses. Yeah. Leahy needs 51 Republicans on board for the major procedural moves he makes. As I understand it, you know, people like Susan Collins, Mitt Romney. You might imagine could have some doubts about some aspects of trying to really truncate this proceeding. And for Collins impeachments, pretty popular in Maine the last time I looked. And she’s not popular. So that would seem to have some electoral implications for her in particular. But that’s only one person. It just seems so unlikely that enough Republicans are going to see it in their political interest. And look, frankly, when you see that Republican voters have they have not budged on impeachment. I looked at this last week and they started it September 24th when the hearing started. They had 9.7 percent approval rating for impeachment. And now I think it’s at 9.4.


S4: Right. That’s huge. Can I. Can we talk about the letter the president wrote? Yes. Funston, NC politely, Letha, because I think prize. And while I thought it was a masterstroke on the president’s part.


S10: Yes. So when it first came out, many, many people said this is completely unhinged, ithad. It was basically like a rally, but in a letter. Right.


S4: So it had all of the disconnect making line exclamation points.


S12: Lots of deliberate falsehoods told with for the purpose of misleading people. Lots of deliberate falsehoods told for the purposes of confusing people. All of the kind of bags of tricks were all collected, all collected in one special gift package for the holiday season. And a lot of people like this is bonkers. Oh my God. It’s evidence that he should be impeached for me. Would it read like was a read like a rally in in the in letter form? And so what’s the purpose of those rallies? It’s to keep the Republican based on his side. But more to the point, it’s to first disseminate the information which was disseminated, as everybody said, oh, my gosh, the letter so crazy. President says, thank you very much now. Twice as many people know about it. Second thing is any senator who is wavering now has constituents in his state who have been informed by this letter. If it had been a dry discussion of the legal points, they would not be enraged. They are now enraged. And so he has put more adhesion between and, you know, he and the Republican senators are more stuck together as a result of that letter than if it had been an actual legal letter, which apparently his lawyers didn’t look at until it was done.


S1: I totally agree. And the other thing I thought was really well-crafted about it is there is falsity and wild exaggeration in it. But you have to know something to know what’s false and misleading. It’s really very canny, I think, in taking quotes out of context, making various moves like once you see the fact-checked version of it that’s up on The New York Times website, you can see through it. But you have to read it through that filter. If you just repeat it verbatim, it seems like he’s got a bunch of really good points.


S10: And and we should say that none of us in discussing it in this way are for a second. Trying to normalize what it is, which is an abrogation of the duties of the office, which are to have some respect for truth and for the process and for your role in the constitutional system. So all of those things are are confronted by this letter and it breaks with all of those traditions and it breaks with honest and good doing. But as a political matter, it’s quite effective.


S1: Well, I think the fact that we’re actually responding to the theater of it means that in some ways this is a really successful breaking of norms. Right. Like if you. And both admire the political craft of it and then say, well, wait a second. Like the wait a second becomes less powerful.


S12: Well, let me ask you this question. If it’s a court of law, let’s say Johnnie Cochran, when he defended O.J. Simpson, you know, he said if it doesn’t fit, you must acquit. Right. He used rhyme to bring it up, down. And one thing that was very clever. Right. It wasn’t great legal genius citing previous case law, blah, blah, blah. So in defense of of your client, theatricality sometimes is a big deal. It’s not within the normal lines, but it does get the guy off the hook. So it’s heartfelt, consistent with that, which is not you know, which is not just about politics. It’s a way court courts work, too.


S5: All right. Let’s finish up with this point. My point. So between the impeachment of Andrew Johnson and the impeachment. Well, Richard Nixon was not a peach, but would have been impeached on an account that was an empty resignation is ninety two years. It’s an order between Nixon’s resignation and the Clinton impeachment, 24 years ‘tween. The Clinton impeachment today is 21 years. How long until there’s another impeachment? I say it. We will not get another 10 years without impeachment.


S1: Oh, really? I hope you’re wrong. So, I mean, I find unnerving the argument that we are on our way to normalizing impeachment. That’s going to just become another tool in the toolbox. I take comfort in the fact that if you were going to make that argument, I feel like the Clinton impeachment was a more powerful example, because though wrong, doing the, you know, perjury or alleged perjury by Bill Clinton had to do with his private conduct because of his high approval rating at the time. They’re just factors about that proceeding that seemed more specific and more trivializing of the procedure that the process couldn’t we. That’s a good point.


S10: Sure. I you know, remember that before this impeachment, the conventional wisdom was if you go impeaching a president, it’s dead disaster for you because you remember, you know, how it basically led to the losses in 1998, despite Newt Gingrich’s predictions that Republicans would pick up seats. And then when he was wrong about Republicans picking up seat seats in an impeachment, not being a problem, he was then booted basically out of his out of the speakership. So it was seen as toxic. So in this case, if the conventional wisdom it’s going to is that it’s maybe going to be get easier, maybe we should just say, actually, no, it won’t. Also, this this affects the case here. So, so different. The president is is very unpopular and super unpopular relative to how well the economy is doing. So, yes, it’s a special case.


S7: Withdrawn, Mayor Pete, or as he is now hashtagged and never Pete has become a strange bugaboo to a set of voters. Are those voters Republicans who don’t like a Democrat? No, they’re not. Are they homophobes who don’t want a gay candidate? They are not. Are they old people who are grumpy at a young, successful presidential kind of? No, they are young white progressives, people who are not unlike Mayor Pete himself. And they’re agitated at the prospect of Pete Boobage topping Bernie Sanders or topping Elizabeth Warren to become the Democratic nominee. So, Emily, where do this backlash against Bridgette’s come from? What is its source? Why now?


S1: I mean, it seems like it’s sort of the liberal Twitter, liberal millennial Twitter. As far as I can tell. I mean, I just can’t tell how extensive it is or if it’s just loud, which is true about everything.


S13: And I.


S1: So I guess the what I can understand about it is this feeling of like, who is this guy? Especially, I think if he’s sort of a peer of yours, you might be more irritated by that. Right. Like mayor of fourth largest city in Indiana, not someone who in previous elections would be top tier presidential material. And then I think for people on the left, there’s the sense that but Adjudge is moderating his positions, is positioning himself as an alternative to Biden. And they don’t want that wing of the party to triumph. Whether it’s the old version or the young version. And so they’re going after him for that reason.


S10: I think everything that Emily says is right. Derek Thompson, I thought, wrote a great piece in the Atlantic kind of going through the four reasons. Just it was really wonderful and I recommend it to everybody to read it. But I just picking up on your point, Emily. So he embodies a certain kind of behavior they don’t like and he embodies a certain kind of politics. And if the central debate for me has always been in the Democratic race, you know, do we go bold because that’s the only way we’re going to win. Then he is it symptomatic of the triangulation of the Clinton years? But without. Well, which they never liked, even when Bill Clinton was winning.


S4: And it is not even a senator. Right. Right. Well, and I meant even Bill Clinton. They didn’t like his triangulation. And he came in. I’m not even a governor.


S12: He’s kind of been a governor. And so it means even if he wins, as bad as Donald Trump may be, it means that he’s going to win by having Santa kind of moderate signal, which means that the results will be inevitably moderate.


S14: But why does he get that vitriol? And Joe Biden, who is what much more likely to defeat Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders, to name the two most progressive candidates does not get that vitriol from the TV content because beauty judges and riding rising in the polls.


S1: And it’s kind of his turn to take a beating in that just sort of like cycle of campaigns and which, like you, no one really notices you and you’re on the rise and you’re like the new flavor of the month. And then the press starts taking some whacks at you and people start finding you worth irritation. I think that’s the cycle only could come out of the cycle and the judge could still have a good poll numbers. He could still win Iowa.


S12: And I think back to Emily’s point, as he’s doing in real time what they don’t like, which is slightly tweaking his positions, kind of being all things to all people.


S1: And the McKinsey background is getting more attention in a way that, if you’re on the left, starts to seem disappointing. Right. McKinsey is tarnished right now based on news reporting about its government contracts, its work abroad, deservedly tarnished. I would argue it’s not a great moment to be like, hey, look at me, I’m a former management consultant.


S7: I mean, there is this quality of him being in. Derek Thompson gets it, this traitor to a generation that his generation is a generation that seeks to upend a system. And it’s a system that he in, you know, so join so avidly. You know, it’s a as a as a soldier, as a Rhodes Scholar, Ivy League graduate. You know, he’s somebody who believed in that system. The millennial grind is an unattractive type, I guess.


S9: He’s sort of an old soul. Well, anyway, that might get annoying if you’re his age. Not that I can imagine such a thing.


S3: Do you remember there was this line about Al Gore which stuck to him that he was an old person’s idea of a young person?


S6: Michael Kinsley came up with that line that Mike. I think I now gonna stick that onto people. Well, pick up some of that same quote.


S10: Yeah, I had this feeling as I was reading the pieces about this phenomenon. I had this it just kind of immediately hit me, which is how my daughter reacts when my wife tells her she’s well, she should wear a coat when it’s cold outside, which is Bhuta judges the olds version of what you youngsters should be like and should and and should like for the party. I mean, because this is the debate about what’s gonna be successful for the party, and that gets to this question of where is the election going to take place? And if it’s really about hundred thousand votes in eight states, the pro booted JEJ argument is those hundred thousand votes in those more conservative states are places he can play and Bernie and Elizabeth Warren.


S1: But I mean, the biggest difference to me between Jim Biden is one of them has the support of African-American voters. One of them does not always African-American voters matter. And those dates, they matter at large.


S7: Right. That this is the Twitter objections to bridges are not nearly as important to the fact that he cannot so far as attract anybody.


S12: Now, play that out for me, though. Why does that matter?


S1: Why do black voters matter? Well, no matter because they’re in there such a loyal heart and soul component of the party, and they matter because they’re depress turnout in places like Detroit were, you know, dizzily torrio in North Carolina.


S8: That’s the positive. The reason I ask that you’re the lawyer.


S10: The reason I ask that question is that a lot of what the Democratic Party is going through, the the Republican Party went through. And so people would say, but wait a minute, where are diehard, you know, religious voters going to go if they they’re not going to black a vote for Hillary Clinton. They have their baok so they can stay home. Now, here’s the argument that’s interesting to me about African-Americans is what have they heard about Donald Trump from all of the leaders of the Democratic Party, which is that he’s a stone cold racist. So is it the case that they wouldn’t turn out if if that were if that were so that I’m interested in how that plays out?


S6: This is a big question. It’s a really it’s a risky thing.


S1: You have a sense that Trump is a threat because of racism and still want your the alternative to feel like they’re really your person. Right. And I think that’s what’s lacking with boudica.


S10: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. No, I totally get that. I’m just wondering if your choice in the end of the day is between Donald Trump and Pete Pudi, judge and ID and Donald Trump has been associated by your party for months and months and months with this attack on your identity.


S1: Maybe you come out in the same numbers, maybe you know, but but you a small dip is a big deal and maybe shirkers stay home. And, you know, people feel like voting is futile for reasonable reasons. Right. Like they feel like their lives aren’t changing enough, that things haven’t improved. It’s hard to motivate total vote.


S10: And such is why you usually try and get people to vote on identity grounds, because then they’re voting for it as a piece of personal agency, not having to do with the presidency necessarily. But how dare you try and take this away from me? And I guess what I’m wondering then is really whether the constant drumbeat from Democrats about the president being a racist is actually not that powerful or maybe it’s not enough.


S5: Yeah, I want to finish on another question I have about being a judge. One of the things that I think distinguishes him, particularly in the field from. Certainly from Sanders and Biden, he is preternaturally calm, his calmness is really striking when you listen to him talk and you just watch him interact with people, it’s it’s kind of astonishing. Is that a strength or weakness? I mean, I think it’s clearly it’s a characterological strength in general. But as a politician, is that calmness help him or hurt him?


S1: I think in many moments it helps. And. On the debate stage, it’s been a strength. But when you watch the footage of him dealing with people are unhappy with him in South Bend in the black community, it became a weakness. It was so cerebral. He seemed a little robotic in that setting. And if you think of the part of the president where you want someone in a difficult moment to kind of come through for the nation and embody, you know, like a big we’ve had this with these terrible mass shootings, you want someone who feels like they’re giving you heart and some emotional centering. I wonder he probably would be able to figure out how to do it. I don’t think it’s like impossible to generate that. But he doesn’t seem to be natural at that part of the job.


S10: What’s interesting is, you know, that was the charge against Obama, a little bit too cerebral to Spock like. I think for the eulogising part of the of the job where you are the consoler in chief. I think he could do that. It would be, you know, in the tradition of Clinton’s eulogies and and Obama’s and Reagan’s when everything goes to hell.


S12: I think the communist is good where it doesn’t.


S10: And what’s an important part of the job is you need to be a little crazy in the job and relentless about your ideas and crazy when everybody saying, no, you can’t do that. You have to put grind the screw driver in regardless of everybody telling you it’s going to blow up the machine because as you only way you get the machine to work and so does he have that quality. And that’s what people argue. I think with Sanders and Warm, which is, you know, stop telling me about how this isn’t going to work. They are going to be so have the courage of their convictions coming out of every pore and somehow they’re gonna make away. I don’t you know, we can ask a question whether that really is the way things work or not. But he hasn’t shown that yet. And that’s the way you get to the extent you get anything done. You get you get it done.


S5: Slate plus members, you know who you are. You get bonus segments on the gabfest and other Slate podcasts and today’s Slate Plus segment, real special one, very special slate plus segment. We’re going to read you poetry. Actually, I’m not going to be poetry when I read something else. But we’re gonna read to you some favorite passages of ours were poems of ours. You go to Slate.com, Flush Gabfests plus to become a member today. If you look back at the year 2013, the end of year, we’re all looking back. What happened? What are the big stories? What do we miss? What are the most important things that happened? So we’re gonna try to do that. We now have the perspective of the year. There’ve been there were tons of different stories. Amazing things happen this year, some of which were really important, some of which were trivial. And I’m I’m interested in us having a conversation about when we look back when each of us looks back. What are the things that stick out most as really representing big themes of history or big themes of what’s happening in the world?


S14: And I mean, I have I have for myself. But oh, my God, you wait for I have four. All right. But but I’m looking elsewhere for Emily. Why don’t you start? Yeah.


S8: So to take a step back, like really to 20000 feet, I feel like the big question, people go to forty thousand thirty five, 20000 feet high, very low plane that you will. It’s very they try to get higher than that. You’re not really above the weather.


S13: I don’t know what I just portrayed about myself. I’m skipping the treetops if you want real perspective.


S9: Astronaut David, if you take a step back, that to me, the biggest issues in the world, which are not just this year, maybe there are like of the decade, are the intersection between immigration and climate change and how mass migration, which I think we’ve only are just beginning to imagine is going to affect how countries see themselves, how people feel about citizenship and about the way the world’s population is presumably going to move. So with that as my own backdrop, the stories that we’re about, both how immigrants are moving their reception in the United States, you know, in particular are a family separation policy, the distress about that. But then in the end, we haven’t really walked that back. We’ve basically the Trump administration has really tried with some blocking from the courts to move the country away from a traditional understanding of asylum. And then I think you also see in Europe a lot of nervousness and reaction to immigrants that we’re gonna continue to trace their own is going to matter. And I will stop there, though. I have other ideas as well.


S7: So I think they’re one of the things we saw and we talked about it in segments about the chaos voters. We talked about it in just throughout impeachment, talking about the influence of Fox News on the White House, talking about with Brexit, talking about it with Israel. Is this phenomenon of.


S3: The chaos voters and the polarization and the loss of effectiveness and coherence in political systems and the loss of effectiveness and coherence in the U.S. political system. It’s complete polarization, which again we see in the impeachment we just talked about and the development of totally separate narratives that people have. We see that in the United States. We see it in Great Britain with Brexit. We see it in Europe. We see it in in India. We see see that as a piece of it. In India, sort of this nationalism and tribalism, separate narratives and a kind of loss of faith in the basic democratic political systems that have developed in many countries. And that’s that to me seems to be the big one of the big real themes of the year.


S11: So mine was one of those, although they’re connected because the liberal order that used to care about refugees and migrants was kept in part by the United States or other democracies who believe that. And you remember when Theresa May and President Trump had that joint press conference together and there was a question about migrants and immigration. And she referred back to our values. And she meant the, you know, the kind of liberal Western order. Freedom House does a survey every year about the march of democracy. And it is at its third. It is at its lowest point in a decline of the last 13 years. So it continues to go down. And it’s not just in fledgling democracies or, you know, countries that were struggling with it, but in the main old timey actors known no actor larger than the United States, which used to feel it was invested in. And it’s amazing when you go back and read Ronald Reagan’s speech to the British parliament. It was invested in promoting democracy, not like promoting democracy in countries like Afghanistan and Iraq and the Bush project, but just the idea of doing everything you can to foster freedom and democracy because it was healthy on it on its own terms and that that’s going away.


S1: One thing, this Segways, too, I think, is the sense in the United States and in some other countries, among white people, especially less educated white people, that their status, their lives are shrinking, that their sense of decline, that we actually have statistics in the United States that life span is declining for this particular group. That’s a big thing. Opioid crisis is linked to this, this just sense of loss of power, the the fear that immigrants are coming and taking things from you, that it was one thing to live in a country where there were like some people of color. But now in the next, you know, 50 years, we’re gonna be asking white Americans to really give up their majority status in this country without violence and without trying to cling to it so desperately that they destroy the democratic order. And that, I don’t think is a phenomenon we’ve really seen a country accomplish. So when you think of it in those terms, I don’t mean to excuse the racism that the sense of threat can engender and perpetuate, but in some ways it’s a tall order and I feel like we are seeing these symptoms of it.


S11: You mean it’s a tall order to manage how to be a leader or how to have a government that works when diversity is happening and changing so fast?


S1: Yeah. I mean, when you were quoting Reagan a minute ago, I was thinking that he was speaking to a kind of largely white country in which people had, you know, America’s always had heterogeneity. It’s one of our most celebrated facets. I totally believe that we are stronger for all our immigrants. But I think for a lot of white Americans, there was a more sense of social fabric and commonality then than they feel now.


S10: Well, that’s right. I mean, one of the challenges for our presidents and our next one who have whether it’s in four or eight in four years or one year, is is to live in a world of all of the diversity that’s happening in America, how to manage it. And at both in terms of policy, but then also in how to talk about it. And this is one of the obviously big debates with Donald Trump, is that he is his he’s not as interested in how to manage it. He’s interested in using it successfully, which when I said to Bob Corker when he was leaving the Senate and I’ve said this a few times in the interviews for the book, I’ve I’ve said, you mean, you know, like you think that’s what he does. And everybody looks at me like I’m crazy. They’re like that. He says that’s what he does. You know, in other words, driving those divisions as a way to win political power.


S5: Let’s move on to other themes of the year. So I want to identify another theme that I saw this year, and that is that I think we are in the middle of a period of enormous that if you look back at 1968, 1969, late 60s, early 70s, it was a period of mass protest chaos, political instability, which I think people recognized at the time. I think we are in the middle of that. We haven’t quite recognized it. I would say we haven’t had the same level of rioting. But this year we had the proud boys in Portland. We had these political mass shootings like the El Paso mass murder, the mass shootings in Jersey City, the three blocks in a guy you think might have been an 18. But. But it’s all it’s linked. It’s a theme that I think we’re in it. Think there is this one thing I see in this year is that that there is this political instability, political chaos, fear that is that is pervading the country. And I think it’s just gonna get worse. So that’s another theme that I saw this year.


S10: This isn’t a theme, but it is. The Afghanistan papers are something that we talked about last week, but that are the more you read them and the more you look at all the decision making that went into them that still exists and all the mind, it’s it’s a story that just everybody blew past and that everybody should spend a lot more time thinking about.


S1: I want to bring up I think this is the year that the country and perhaps the world finally realized that the promises of social media companies and technology companies in general that they’re making the world better is just hollow and in a lot of cases just completely wrong. And there was just much more willingness to reckon with the bad consequences of Facebook and YouTube and and even Amazon, which I think is like a really healthy, good development that we’re really thinking in a more complex way about the implications of what these companies do.


S10: Do you think you’ll look back at social media in Teekay number of years the way you did your heaviest period of drinking in high school or college and think like, man, I can’t believe it. I used to do shots of liquor and, you know, and then at midnight. Thought that was a good idea. And you just feel so distant and so dissipated and harmful.


S1: I mean, I kind of hope we think about that, because then it would mean that like tweets, we’re not driving television coverage and people’s awareness in a way that I think has been so problematic. Right. It’s not. I mean, there are so many different facets to this. One is the way in which governments have figured out how to manipulate social media in a way that perpetuates disinformation campaigns and makes elections less fair. That’s like a big problem in itself. Then there is the link between social media and legacy media and the way in which someone’s tweeting will drive television coverage. Super lazy way of going about covering anything much to look at what’s happening on Twitter implicitly and explicitly.


S4: Yeah. In other words, they will literally say, I saw this on Twitter and know and the president knows it that uses that and uses it brilliantly, brilliantly from the Senate, from the sort of Machiavellian sense there.


S1: All the privacy implications. Right. Which are with us all the time as well and are another kind of theme. And people have consumers have not figured out a way to really mobilize and fight back. It’s been too confusing, too unclear what’s really at stake. But I hope that there a Ryan rising awareness about all of those problems.


S7: I have one more theme, which is I think this was the year that we recognized there’s been great concern about the Trump presidency from lots of different quarters. This is the year I think we realized the way in which his undermining the institutions of government for his own corrupt and personal purposes is so dangerous. And I think we look at this with the the entire Ukraine issue with one Bill Barr’s emergence and the use of Bill Barr to take the weaponry of the justice system and apply it in sinister ways. The National Emergency Declaration to build the wall. There was this year the purge of the Homeland Security Department, the census case. These are all examples where the kind of basic the attacks on the State Department, on the on the ambassadors, these are all cases where the institution of government, which we’ve been relied on, the kind of steadiness of that is being eroded and very strongly by President Trump. But I think that this is a year we really saw a ton of that and it’s been possible.


S15: I think there are different categories of that. I think the wall I think you could argue the wall and going around specific congressional intent on the wall, separate part from Ukraine, which was also a denial of specific congressional intent and a law he signed.


S10: But I think the wall in for me is in a category of this. What I campaigned on, this is what I was voted for and use. I’m in a push, the executive branch. Absolutely to its breaking point to do what my people who elected me to do as a. Which is slight, which is what Democrats wanted Bill Barack Obama to do, which is slightly different than those other categories, which are feel like much more norm threatening. But I would add, if I may, just very quickly, is the complete and total ownership of the Republican Party from Donald Trump, which I think really I mean, on every possible issue, whether it’s trade deficits, the party in Russia, I mean, the Republican Party did very well for 50, 60 years as being the party that was more anti-Russia and here. And and he has now basically flipped Republican sentiment completely on that. So on these key policy issue areas, at least rhetorically, some people would say, well, they never really believe those things. Whatever. We don’t see that kind of rhetorical flip in politics. A short period time, then also on values, morality, but then also when you look at some of the Republican senators who are now some of his strongest defenders, by which I mean they’re willing to to act ways that used to be outside of what even, you know, what even senators used to do. I’m thinking of Lindsey Graham, Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz. They haven’t just quietly gone along. They have risen to his defense and said things that are implausible or that are embarrassing relative to things they said before. These are men that he mocked, belittled and over whose bones he ascended to greatness. And so they would have all these reasons for not rising up in his defense. And yet they’re doing kind of best in class performance in. And why are they doing that? It’s because of his extraordinary power in the party. And they, like all politicians and before them, are attracted to power.


S16: OK, let’s go to cocktail chatter. We’re gonna have some cocktails tonight. We are gonna have cocktails tonight. What are we to be chattering about with each other as we have our cocktails?


S1: Emily Cocktails before my red eye flight home. I have a super local chapter. I’m going to hopefully make it relevant more than just my neighborhood. Although maybe not so. I live on a street in which on the corner there is this wonderful Italian grocery store that’s been there for 30 Jack True called Romulans. Azari is really just called Romeos and it is closing around Christmas this year, which is a tragedy for our neighborhood. So I have just like a huge feeling of appreciation for Romeo’s Simeon, who owns the store, and his daughter, Francesca. So now I’m going to try to save this with. I was thinking, why do I appreciate the store so much? And I feel like the store I’m about to tell is not one that you could tell about most grocery stores. But, man, it would be great if we lived in a world where everyone had this. So years ago, when my younger son was littler, we sent him with some money to buy something at Romeo’s one day and he came home with what we said goodbye.


S13: And all the money. Were like, you need to go and pay for that. And he was like, oh, like. He really basically thought of this door as like his kitchen cupboard. Yeah. Yes. Now it was not his kitchen. And we did send him back. He did pay for it. But I mentioned this recently to Fran, Romeo’s daughter, who often works the cash register. And she was like, oh, of course, we understood. Of course, we would never have a right had your child arrested for shoplifting. And like it would just be a better world if every nine year old boy could go to the corner store and accidentally take something without paying for it, get sent back to pay for it. But like not pay any repercussions for it. So thank you, Romeo and Fran.


S14: Emily, the door thing, larceny.


S8: Yes, exactly. John, just don’t call it what crime are you going to endorse it?


S10: Why? So I have two very short chapters. One is an amazing piece that the in The Times about and we’re in Oakland and it just happens to be about an Oakland homeless encampment. The it’s an amazing collection of pictures and interviews with the people who live there. It’s by Thomas Fuller and Josh Hanner, I guess is how you pronounce it. And Thomas wrote about this guy, Gilbert Gilberto Gonzalez ariha, who just go read it. And the pictures are amazing. And then they went to Mexico City and compared the homeless in came in Oakland with the shanty town of Mexico City. It’s it’s just it’s there anyway. It’s I mean, it’s really, really well done. My other chatter is about fifty seven hundred year old human genome, an oral microbiome that was found from Chewed Bertsch pitch. So basically this looks like a piece of bubble gum. This young girl was found. They found this Bertsch pitch and they were able to determine all of this. First of all, check out her whole DNA and basically figure out what she’d eaten. And now they are. This article in the journal Nature thinks that Bertsch pitch might be which they chewed for medicinal benefits, basically, that it might have all of this old DNA and allow studies to go back and study more than just this random one, one girl.


S11: So it’s not only an amazing discovery in its own right, but it might be the key to opening up further discoveries about DNA and how we came to be humans.


S14: Cool. My chatter, people who know me well know that I am a bubble tea addict. I have bubble tea every day that I’m allowed to. Some days I can’t find a bubble tea place, but I will find it on those sad day. There are very sad days when I can’t findability impact on me at a public event.


S9: I was gonna say I don’t think you’ve had one to know.


S14: I’m going to get one after after have lunch. And there’s a great during the Washington Post about the Taiwan bubble. Tea wars. Taiwan is the ground zero bubble. Tea was invented there. And there’s a tremendous innovation in bubble tea that’s coming out of Taiwan. And most of the very successful chains internationally, including in the U.S., are actually Taiwanese chains. But what’s happened is that these chains are also doing business and in addition, doing business in Taiwan and the U.S. are doing a lot of business in China. And they have to toe the party line in China and say things that that comport with what the Chinese government wants said about Hong Kong and about Tibet and about Taiwan even. And and so they have ended up sort of supporting the Chinese government over Hong Kong, for example, and that has made Taiwanese in Taiwan extremely unhappy. And so now there’s a boycott of a lot of the Taiwanese grown bubble tea places that are doing business in China and people aren’t going to them in Taiwan. So even though they’re thriving in China, they’re doing poorly in Taiwan because people are like, why are you supporting the Chinese government, which is not a government we agree with? And so now there’s a flourishing of independent Taiwanese bubble tea shop. People are frequenting very farseeing. For those of us in the bubble, teno very fascinating issue. It’s called the bubble tea. Good. Or you’re not sure? Well, the Taiwanese bubble tea places are great and they are so innovative. There’s just so much stuff going on.


S4: What’s the what is the avenue of innovation?


S3: There’s this thing called cheese tea, which sounds gross, but it’s a it’s kind of a creamy layer on top of your bubble tea. There’s different things you put in them besides Bubb Boba did with other form like pudding and kind of jelly that are in them.


S6: Dessert. But they’re on dessert. Yeah, sure. Dessert.


S12: Let me ask you this question. If it’s bubble tea without the boba, how aren’t you taking the butter?


S6: You have the bubble too. You can’t have it, but you cannot just.


S3: Yeah. And then there are different forms of fruit tea. There are there’s these tiger milk ones which are like have some weird brown sugary concoction which I’ve never had because the lines are way too long at those places and they seem very sweet anyway.


S4: Lot of a lot of balti innovation in one. When you bite into the tapioca a a metal spike shoots through your jaw. That’s so good at all. Some of the some of our listeners will get where that came from.


S14: All right. Superhero reference anyway. Don’t don’t ask, don’t ask. Let’s leave it in mystery. So, listeners, you’ve also been giving us great chatters. Are really good chatters this week. You tweet them to us. That’s like Gabfest. And this one is so epic. It’s from ionic tonic at Ionic Tonic. And it’s pointing us to a Twitter account from at Greenly.


S3: J.W., who goes by surprised eel historian. And it’s a series of tweets and actually investigate who Greenly J.W. is. It’s a series of tweets about the importance of eels in the mediæval and and kind of renaissance British economy. That eels were often paid used to pay rent. The Eels would be John Years a Catholic. They were. They were. What is it? You can’t. They were not fish. They were not counted as fish.


S6: You could have them on Friday. You could have them during Lent. You could have them during. And he was doing whatever it is that you’re supposed to eat fish on Friday.


S3: Yet notan land sales count or eels counted as fish, but they also count it because they ace. They didn’t understand. Had they reproduced? They didn’t. They had no CARNEL quality. And so that you were allowed to eat them at all kinds of occasions where you couldn’t eat other things. And there all these rules about, you know, particular ponds.


S7: There’s a there’s a an example of of an eleven seventy nine King Henry. The second gave his best otter hunter some property in Aylesbury with a condition the king could stop by up to three times a year and get a meal of three eels. There was a King Henry the first, the King Henry the first died after eating a meal of eels. Oh, there you pay. You know the feast where one hundred thousand eels will be ordered anyway. Fascinating Twitter account about eels, which are disgusting, incidentally. So don’t they? I once saw an eel in the real world. It was gross. But the Twitter account. Amazing.


S2: That is our show for today. The gabfest is produced by Josslyn. Frank is here with us in Oakland at Skyline Studios. Brian Matheson and Anne Marie Pelo. Gabriel Roth is the editorial director of Slate podcast. Jan Thomas is the managing producer of Slate podcast. You should follow us on Twitter and at Slate Gabfests and tweet your chatter to us there for Emily Bazelon and John DICKERSON.


S17: I’m David Plotz. Thanks for listening. We will talk to you next week with our Conundrum Show.


S18: This is the you about your box of chocolates entitled Quality of food. Yes.


S6: If I maybe get Monty Python that through a Monty Python sketch, the crunchy frog sketch. Oh, no.


S16: Hello. Slate plus. How are you? Good. Nice. Good idea. That’s funny. Oh, you shopping was difficult. Yes, I know. Well, maybe you should do it online. I don’t know. I don’t go to the malls any more socially. Plus, today, we’re going to talk about we’re not really and talk about anything.


S7: We had an idea a few weeks ago that we would read poems and we never got around to it. But then we were like, well, let’s do it. We’re here together. And I’m actually not going to read a poem.


S6: I think we should do this at the end of every year. Yeah, I knew. Annual tradition is an annual tradition. Have we done it before? We did it once before. I’m afraid I read the bone that I’m about to read. I have the fear that I’ve read the thing I’m in. You know, this is a new book. It’s a new poll. All right.


S14: Let’s start with Labadee. Then we know it’s new material.


S9: So I chatted about my friend Dwayne Betts, his new book of poetry, which is called Felon. And this is a poem from that book called Blood History. The things that abandoned you get remembered different as precise as the English language can be with words like penultimate and perceiver aid. There is not a combination of sounds that describe old me that leaving once drinking and smoking with buddies. A friend asked if I’d longed for a father. How do you said wanted? I would have dismissed him in the way that youngins dismiss it all. A shrug. Sarcasm. A jab to his stomach. Laughter. But he said, longing. And in a different place. I might have wept, said once. My father lived with us. And then he didn’t. And it fucked me up so much that I never thought about his leaving until I held my own son in my arms. And only now speak on it. A man who drank Boon’s farm and Mad Dog like water once told me and some friends that there is no word for father where he comes from. Not like we know it there. The word father is the same as the word for. Listen, the blends we passed around, let us forget our tongues. Not that much, though. But what if the old had knew something? And if you have no father, you can’t hear straight. Years later, another friend wondered why I named my son after my father. You know, that’s a thing. Turn your life to a prayer that no dead man gonna answer.


S10: JOHNS Good. What’s your poem? Mine, and I apologize if I’ve read this before to the listeners, the gab fest. But it bears repeating. It’s sorting it out by Philip Booth at the table she used to sew at. He uses his brass desk scissors to cut up his shirt. Not that the shirt was that far gone. One ragged cuff, one elbow through. But here he is, cutting away the collar sheet long since turned. What gets to him? Finally using the scissors like a bright claw is prying button’s off after they’ve lapped spinning on the floor. He bends to retrieve both sizes. He intends to save them in some small box. He knows he has a reason to save. If only he knew where a small box used to be kept.


S7: I do not have a home. I have my favorite writing in English is by Lytton Strachey, the book called Eminent Victorian and in particular its Piz. It’s a series of short biographies, short, very acidic biographies of Victorian characters, and one of them the profiles as Florence NIGHTINGALE. I love the beginning of his essay about Florence NIGHTINGALE. Everyone knows the popular conception of Florence NIGHTINGALE, the saintly, self-sacrificing woman, the delicate maiden of high degree who threw aside the pleasures of a life of ease to succor the afflicted. The lady with the lamp gliding through the horrors of the hospital, Scutari and consecrating with the radiance of her goodness, the dying soldier’s couch. The vision is familiar to all, but the truth was different. The Miss NIGHTINGALE, a fact was not a facile fancy, painted her. She worked in another fashion, and towards another end. She moved under the stress of an impetus which finds no place in the popular imagination. Demon possessed her, no demons, whatever else they may be, or full of interest. And so it happens that in the real Miss NIGHTINGALE, there was more that was interesting than in the legendary one. There was also less that was agreeable. That’s the first paragraph. It just goes on and on and on. So God love the ending of that. All right. Slate plus. We’ll talk to you next week. But by.

S1: If you want to start something tell everyone you know you’re going to do it. And then you have a choice. Welcome to a special Slate Plus get past Get back Get back get this for September 12th 2019.


S2: I am David Plotz. I’m in Washington D.C.. JOHN DICKERSON CBS 60 Minutes is in New York. Emily Bazelon of Yale and the New York Times Magazine is in Houston and she’s in Houston. She was just at the Democratic debate.


S3: I know what’s broken. I want to be in the fight to fix it. I learned that the way you deal with it is you deal with finding purpose. What resilience means to me is that throughout my political career. I have taken on virtually every. Powerful special interest in this country. When I trusted voters to judge me based on the job that I did for them.


S4: They decided to trust me and re-elected me with 80 percent of the vote.


S5: Don’t you ever listen and let anybody ever tell you what you can or cannot be. You have to believe in what can be unburdened by what has been the first.


S1: Single stage democratic debate that we’ve had and we’re gonna do a special guest fest tonight.


S6: Let’s start with you Emily because you were there in the room where you weren’t really with him. You were not in the room.


S7: I wasn’t in the hall. I was in the filing room with all the media I’ve discovered or John clued me in this morning that that’s how it works.


S8: But you were curious you were closer to the actual oxygen that was being breathed by the people on stage. So was there a moment that you feel was a symbolic moment or important moment that we’re going to carry forward. I think we’ve learned from debates so far that it does tend to be moments rather than the whole evening that people remember.


S9: Yeah I mean the moment was like Castro and Biden snapping at each other and whether it hurt both of them or one of them.


S10: What I support and what you support Vice President Biden is that you require them to opt in. And I would not require them to opt in. They would automatically be enrolled.


S11: They wouldn’t have to buy and they do not have to buy. You just said that you just said that two minutes ago you just said two minutes ago that they would have to buy it. You said they would have to buy out to buy it qualifies. Are you forgetting what you said Maddox would be for.


S7: What you said just two minutes ago. Yeah that was what I took from it was that sharpness. And that was really because it was the only exchange that was like really like that there was some testiness but that was the only one that really cut. So am I making a mistake to start us off there is that just like falling into the trap.


S12: I think it’s hard to know what what the moments are that go on and really matter. Castro obviously he’s you know he is at the end of the end of the line there. He’s not in the polls he’s he. He and Clubber Cha as the bookends at the debate stage are the ones like you know closest to falling off. So they have to do something to make themselves known and he went after Biden. I thought that was interesting. I thought it was interesting when Castro chose to shoot at Biden and making an prosciutto thinly veiled not going Biden’s age and Booker took that moment and decided to try to make a sort of uplifting argument about I think it puts health care at the time. One candidate who seeks to build political capital one who is who is burning it because when you take down the frontrunner it doesn’t ness. It doesn’t always and in fact doesn’t necessarily accrue to your benefit.


S9: You think this one hurt Biden. What did you feel like he came off poorly.


S12: I wasn’t even sure if he was confusing things in the way Castro said if anything is going to hurt Biden I think it’s a combination of things. One he totally conflated his position on Iraq and Afghanistan which people may not have noticed but he answered a question about Afghanistan and talked about the surge in his partition plan his partition plan was for Iraq not Afghanistan. It felt like he would just kind of speak and then you then the chain would kind of catch and gee Eliot more as to who or should economists put it. Well I thought on Twitter we said Biden seems like a guy who’s got a lot on his mind. You know he’s trying to do like 15 different things in an answer I think for some people that might read as what Castro was trying to get at really essentially which is that he’s he’s old. So I think if anything hurts him it’s just that general feeling that he’s that his answers aren’t sharp in some way and that that tells us something larger. But I don’t think it was this specific blunt charge from Castro.


S8: So I have not watched any of the other debates and full I’ve only watched that snippet. So this is the first one I’d watched in full.


S6: And one thing that was so striking to me is there was very little about Trump. Sarah Harris but that that Trump himself was considering how he overshadows politics today. He was not that much part of the debate.


S9: Well don’t you think that what happens is that the small policy differences are relatively small differences among the Democrats get magnified because they’re arguing with each other and also because the questions direct them. I mean the health care section in the beginning went on for a really long time and there are material differences about whether you’re going to end private insurance or not and how much money you’re going to spend. But still the argument they’re having is like over on one side of the spectrum and they kind of you know I think flicked it oh hey remember the person in the White House is the one wrecking Obamacare. I mean Harris mentioned that the Justice Department is suing to stop the AFA and you know to to end the Affordable Care Act. But most of the words are about their differences with each other.


S12: I felt like Harris actually had two of her best moments with respect to Trump which isn’t usually I don’t find that profitable for candidates because we all know they hate em and when they call him names it doesn’t do anything. But I thought in her opening statement when she chose to to spend some of her time directly addressing him. You know it’s a pretty useful expenditure of your time.


S7: First I have a few words for Donald Trump. Well we all know is watching so President Trump.


S13: You spent the last two and a half years full time trying to sow hate and division among us as. And that is why we’ve gotten nothing done. You have used hate intimidation fear and over 12000 lives as a way to distract from your failed policies and your broken promises. But here’s what you don’t get what you don’t get. Is that the American people are so much better than this. And we know that the vast majority of us have so much more in common than what separates us regardless of our race where we live are the party with which we are registered to vote. And I plan on focusing on our common issues our common hopes and desires. And in that way unifying our country winning this election and turning the page for America and now President Trump you can go back to watching Fox News.


S12: You know it’s a pretty useful expenditure of your time to show primary voters what you might look like when you’re taking on the guy they all want to be. A lot of times candidates when they don’t have an answer and don’t have anything interesting to say will say we all need to remember we agree on more than we disagree and the real enemy here is Donald Trump. And that basically means I don’t have anything interesting to say but that’s a good default place. She did something better than that. I thought on healthcare that was actually effective. But other than that I’ve been really surprised that nobody has done something either a to engage the president in a fight that would get the president tweeting about them because what better free publicity than that and b get engaged in a policy fight or a fight on your terms with the president because you need to show Democratic voters that you can do this because that’s what they care about. So that no there were a lot. There’s also a there’s a lot of black of creativity in these candidates which is kind of striking their explanatory skills are pretty weak. And that’s a really useful thing to get voters to listen to you when you take one of these problems and help them understand what’s going on. They don’t do that that well and they’re storytelling. Elizabeth Warren tell us some good stories and occasionally here and there some candidates have told good stories their final answers I thought to the question about resilience were all pretty strong almost all of them were pretty strong and that requires some storytelling but like the basic things that good candidates do they don’t they actually don’t do a lot.


S6: But your point about not going after Trump or not starting a fight with Trump is a really interesting one. I hadn’t even thought about that. Wait.


S9: I’m going to totally defend them on this because this is the lesson from other countries with right wing populist that when you start falling for are bullying and you get caught up in that it diminishes you and to the extent that Warren did that you know a year and a half ago or two years ago and then got into that whole exchange with him. I don’t think that it helped her. I think they’re smart now a policy battle with him. Yeah.


S12: That’s what they should but it should be on policy grounds they should be treating him as like a normal regular sober science candidate even though he’s not that pick a fight that’s on your turf and about your things which you know Biden when he announced his candidacy and led with Charlottesville tried to tempt the president into a fight with him over one of the president’s most glaring moments. It’s a fight on Biden’s turf the emotional space which is his best space in the president’s words. So that’s what I’m talking about is either on policy or any values question you try to tempt the president into a fight on on your turf. I’m not Yeah I’m not talking about like a name calling thing.


S6: Also I think Emily it’s it’s true that if you’re Warren or Biden or Sanders you probably wouldn’t want to do this but if you’re a sort of fringe candidate if you’re sort of on the edge you’re you’re in trouble you’re your Harris in fact then that’s probably your play too to make yourself somehow the center of attention to draw yourself to the top again. Which maybe is what Harris was trying to do. She was the only one who was who was Trump focused. Is there is there a case that this is this debate which appears to me to be a status quo debate that it didn’t it didn’t have any hugely important moments which look like are going to be fatal for anybody or elevate anyone that makes it a big win for Biden because Biden is ahead and he survived another encounter. And so he is it’s built in advantage continues.


S12: I think even I think that having you make a very good point.


S9: Yeah. Do you think Bernie slipped a little bit in the beginning I thought maybe he seemed like he was. I don’t know. Little out of it and then I thought he like got going and what’s his normal Bernie style like that if you are a Bernie person there was plenty to be like. Yeah.


S6: That’s my guy. Well I thought Bernie was I thought he was fine I thought. To me it’s always the. What’s so striking to me is the one just pure so much better than all of them except maybe Mayor Pete who’s very very good on his feet very very smooth very calm but warm just seems to be playing a different game than everybody else. But maybe it’s because I’m I’m baked in for her or something.


S9: So John I wonder what you think about her explaining skills because you are saying you didn’t feel like any of them would do their job.


S7: What about her on that score.


S12: I was she’s bad. I think she’s better than Sanders at explaining that they tend to work the same side of the street. I think she and I have heard her do really good. She does something that’s quite skillful especially for somebody who you know it doesn’t come out of a lifetime of politics which is weaving in her experiences on the campaign trail and that tells you two things one just narratively because stories are important. And it also shows she’s listening on the campaign trail that she’s really taking in information. And if you believe that that’s one of the things that’s important about having a single representative for the whole country is how open are their ears. And so the quick ability to hear a story and incorporate it in a way that’s authentic and not just like the total Mad Libs you know paint by numbers thing is a C is an important skill. I didn’t feel like it was rather righteously on display tonight. And the explaining is when people talk about trade and how 300000 jobs have been lost I think you benefit from explaining how those jobs are lost or how if six hundred dollars by the average family is I think is just saying you know those terrorists being put on Chinese goods and as a result the prices rise and you pay more at the cashier yet people understand what they are. They understand that that’s how it now works. And they feel like they’ve gotten a little bit of a more of a hold on their world. And that I think has a transitive benefit to whoever does the explaining. Especially when the current president is kind of unexplained in things which ought to we’re telling people that things that aren’t so and I don’t know this is something that Bill Clinton was very good at was just explaining the way the world works and what it also does is it creates the predicate then for your great answer about your solution because you’ve just now that you’ve teed up how the world works your see your solution makes all that much more sense.


S6: OK before we go to bed with a million o’clock quick lightning round. Emily any lightning thoughts on tonight.


S9: All right lightning. I was really happy that criminal justice came up again and I loved the way the moderator framed the question and made Harris and club star defend their record as prosecutors. And I was super disappointed that there were no questions again about the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court is going to play a huge role in this next presidency and as far as I can tell it has gotten like the zero to like a tiny bit of attention and all these debates.


S12: John lightning I would go to the last answer on the question about resilience what professional setback you had and what did you learn and how did you bounce back. Because it tells you two things one whatever they can it candidates actually answered which tell you something about them. But also in the way they answered you this is the kind of question you need to have thought about not just in your debate prep but in your life about how you find meaning and what drives you and what your actual real challenges have been. And that shows you a little bit about the way these brains actually work and that’s what the job is is putting a brain up against some of the hardest problems on the globe.


S6: And so it gives you a little bit of a window into what these scattered cats are going to actually have to do in office by lightning Andrew Yang’s proposal to give is a thousand dollars a month to 10 families is definitely the craziest most audacious probably illegal gimmick I’ve ever heard as a campaign promise and do I. One of the things I cannot abide is the way they’re always these guys always say I’m so proud I did this. I’m so proud I did this. If I had a dollar for every time I said I’m so proud I could fund Andrew Yang’s proposal.


S9: But should they replace. I’m so proud with it’s so hard because they have to brag on themselves and then it’s like immediately unappealing.


S6: Yes that’s the problem.


S12: But they could tell a story. You could say we’ve fought really hard and and I’m proud of other people.


S14: And what I might as I write is maybe other people should be president. You know.


S12: Well no but you know it’s implicit in that is your commanding role. Plus you show humility which if they were if the ideas that people get voted for who are the opposite of the incumbent and that would probably be you could make a case that that’s an attractive quality.


S6: All right. Dennis listeners. This was a special Slate Plus gabfest and we were glad to bring it to you tonight. So have a good week. We’ll talk to you soon.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership. The following podcast contains explicit language. Hello welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest.


S2: October 30 2013. You really reached for it on the telephone. Nice leaned into a change their Twitter bios play these weird Halloween Halloween editions.


S3: I’m nuts about with this here. I don’t really like Halloween at all.


S4: I have no interest in it but it’s raining here which is not good for trick or treaters.


S3: That’s Emily Barr’s line of the New York Times Magazine and Yale University Law School. Hello Emily from New Haven Hello.


S5: And then next to me were its Throwback Thursday that super sweaty and John and I are in a studio and it’s unbelievably hot even though it’s the end of October. John Dickerson of CBS is 60 Minutes Hello.


S6: John Dickerson Hello. David it’s great to be in this sweat lodge with you. Oh it’s terrible.


S7: It’s the on you. Yeah you are miserable. Thank you. Oh that’s nice.


S8: On today’s US where he will talk so easily play with us tonight. We will talk about impeachment.


S5: We’re going to talk about the House voting on the procedural rules for the ongoing impeachment investigation the voting that’s happening as we tape then Twitter is banning all political ads all campaign ads all issue ads. Is that the right thing to do or is it superficial then the appalling revenge porn slash workplace sexual misbehavior incident episode that brought down Democratic congresswoman Katie Hill. Plus we’ll have cocktail chatter as we’re taping the House of Representatives has just finished a procedural vote on its ongoing impeachment investigation a vote that will set the rules the procedures for the investigation as it continues in the house. And indeed a Democratic controlled House has by a vote of 232 to 196 voted to approve these procedures every Democrat but two voted in favor two voted Nay and I think one abstained every Republican but three voted against it three abstained. So it was a very partisan division. Jon should we be surprised that the parties held and that Republicans didn’t break ranks at all. I.


S9: I no I don’t think we should be surprised by it.


S6: We should note that 31 Democrats voted to in the basically the equivalent vote in 1998 with Bill Clinton so 31 Democrats voted to go forward with impeachment proceedings. You know just a few things were stating the Republicans have been calling for a transparent open process that has a vote.


S10: Well now they’ve gotten what they called for they’ve said they’ve they’ve moved the goalposts saying that what happened what preceded it makes the whole business unfair and that the poison to rewrite exactly there dare I say fruit of the poisoned tree and they’ve also argued that the rules as the House majority set them up which is perfectly in keeping with tradition and with the process that the rules are unfair to Republicans you know that I think that my from my conversations with the Republicans on the Hill they feel like that they did gain and that they have seen more support for the president in the last few days or so because the argument that the Democrats were being unfair from a process standpoint was at least causing more vocal response from some portion of the Republican base. Why does that matter. Because lawmakers take that into account. So they’re going to stick with this process argument I guess what I wonder is now when these pretty compelling voices come forward these career officials you know whether those voices what they look like now when they’re going to be live and in color. I’m not sure I will. I mean these these hearings are going to be a total circus no matter what.


S5: Maybe they should do them in black and white. That would create even more dignity. Emily what broadly speaking has the House just approved what what is the what are the outlines of the procedures that they’re going to pursue as they move this this impeachment investigation from the private circle this narrow private circle to a more broader public forum.


S11: There will be public hearings. The president’s lawyers will be able to cross-examine witnesses. There will be a procedure where Republican members of the committees can ask to call their own witnesses and there will be votes on those requests. The Democrats on the committee will still control the outcome because they have more votes in the committees because they’re the majority in Congress. But there will be kind of back and forth and a building of the record and it will happen out in the open and it will be challengeable. So in my view it looks solid. It has fundamental elements of due process that we care about and want to see. And a lot of what the Republicans have been asking for. So I think it will be hard for them to keep complaining about process though I’m sure as John pointed out they will try. I mean we’ve already had these completely ludicrous metaphors like talking about you know declaring a mistrial from the Republican majority leader and or whatever the head of the Republicans in the House Kevin McCarthy but ever his title is. So you know there’s already been just such a perversion of these terms getting thrown around that I don’t have a lot of faith that we won’t continue to hear that rhetoric but the public is going to be able to see these people talk and assess their credibility.


S12: What was it John that made Democrats willing to take this vote. They had been resistant for a while. I think there was a Cordray of House members who presumably didn’t want to take this vote because they felt it would be damaging. But something changed. What does that change.


S10: Well I think it’s been a rolling things set of things that have changed. I think the original transcript that we learned this week might have been to call it a transcript as to fall into to a mistake at the get go. So it to the summary of the phone call that that I think was the first thing that pushed a lot of those reluctant Democrats into at least being for an inquiry I think what moved the speaker to have a formal vote I think is a kind of combination of things one is the testimony from people like Bill Taylor who was the top U.S. person in the Embassy in Ukraine which had been compelling the way in which what has leaked from the closed door sessions has established a fact pattern and the storyline that seems to make this look like a serious thing worth investigating. And then I think also probably some pressure on Pelosi that these process arguments are having a little purchase and that they might as well go ahead because that’s where they were inevitably going to end up anyway.


S12: Do either of you guys think these process objections will survive persist thrive in the new now approved procedures.


S11: We’re moving to in terms of the political debate. Going to be that Trump did nothing important wrong. It’s going to be about that question because there’s just not going to really be anything else.


S13: And then you have this question of like is this really bad.


S14: So I was thinking about analogies to Watergate in Watergate. You have Nixon stated in a break in which is like a crime right into you know Democratic headquarters office at the Watergate. And what we have here is the president using the might of his office abroad to try to ask a foreign power to do something scurrilous. So is that equivalent. Is it better. Is it worse.


S10: Worse. Well I think one of the things the challenges is for whoever the leader of I mean this is a challenge of modernity. But it seems to me a particular challenge for Democrats is to is to set the problem at the beginning. You know that’s what you have to do in any case but is to argue as Emily was just doing basically saying here’s what we’re trying to figure out.


S15: Did the president use the government and the whole arm arm of government not only his power on a phone call but also the ambassador to Ukraine and his entire national security apparatus and then build a second up apparatus outside of that for personal political gain. That’s one question the other is did he warp U.S. policy towards Ukraine for personal political gain. That’s another separate category which is important. Did he your vocal blue warp U.S. policymaking by creating what Bill Taylor called the irregular channel which has its own set of problems which is not only related to Ukraine but also all the other ways in which the president used an ill read irregular process for his own personal impulses which have national security implications. Then you have to figure out whether he has obstructed or shredded or caused to shred important U.S. values in the context of defending himself. So for example this week we had Alexander Veneman who is an Army lieutenant colonel who still carries shrapnel in him from an of from an improvised explosive device from Iraq who in the defense of the president some of his allies basically said had dual loyalties. He is literally a poster child for the American idea which is that no matter where you were born you can dedicate your life as an immigrant to that idea. Why is he a poster child. Because Ken Burns made a movie about that in which he used his characters in the movie two young children. One of them was Alexander Vincent and the other was his brother. He’s literally the poster child of a thing that used to be the central argument of Ronald Reagan’s version of America which is that it is such a powerful ideal that people can come and dedicate their lives in the service of that country based on the strength of that idea that this week was shredded in the defense of the president. So what other things have been shredded along the way in defense of the president. And then finally you have the denigration of the Foreign Service which has been a part of this which is in other words to call people who’ve dedicate their lives to foreign service for the country as never trumpeters or as deep staters or some other thing. Those are kind of the main points. And somebody who articulates that originally and basically tries to pull all those threads you were talking about Emily always back to those central questions. And by the way the answer to those questions can be no. The president’s exonerated off we go.


S9: But just keeping the conversation focused in the modern age of attention shredding seems to me to be basically the biggest task here in the next week.


S16: And that’s it. That was very well articulated John. When you put it that way I’m like wow that guy should be impeached.


S12: Emily I have actually have a legalistic might have inquiry here which is so far the president has announced he would not cooperate. They are not that many of the people who ought to be testifying have declined to testify. They’re not turning over documents. They’re not complying with subpoenas. It looks like that’s going to continue. I mean there’s still people testify in the civil service professionals and military officers are coming to testify but it looks like the president is not going to let any key people who are who might have something dastardly to say come and actually give sworn testimony and they’re not going to provide any documentation when they don’t have to. Is there any compulsion that is now going to work. There’s always been this theory that well in impeachment they’ve got to provide these documents. But is are they actually gonna have to provide them. Is the Supreme Court going to push in quickly enough to to compel that what the Supreme Court even compel it.


S4: Oh I am so happy you asked me this because I’m working on a piece for The Times magazine as we speak that will go right next week that tries to delve into these questions so I actually know the answer or at least I have ideas and I have ideas about the history of the answer to so the Supreme Court has never been asked what to do in a case that pits executive privilege.


S14: In other words a claim by the president that you can’t turn over documents you can’t let witnesses testified because they fall within this zone of presidential confidential communications that’s untouchable. That’s executive privilege. The Supreme Court has never decided between executive privilege and a congressional subpoena in an impeachment inquiry in any kind of inquiry. They’ve just never been asked the question or answered it. So we are in uncharted territory. We actually only have a handful of lower court opinions about this question and they don’t settle the matter because they’re not about exactly the same scenario. They’re pretty fact specific and I think only one of them from the Nixon era is actually about the president him or herself.


S17: So the reason that you are seeing Congress proceed with the career professionals Thomas talking about is that those are the willing witnesses and there is nothing that we see in the court in the sort of case law that suggests that willing witnesses who have congressional subpoenas in hand may not testify.


S11: Courts have never said that you asked a different question an unwilling witness a top political official like Mike Pompeo or Rudy Giuliani who of course is not a actual official but is US senior figure in all of this. Those people are unwilling witnesses.


S14: They’re saying we don’t care about your subpoena Congress and they have on their side a direct order from the White House counsel that’s supposed to apply to everyone not to testify. But what’s been totally fascinating is that that direct order from the White House counsel also applies to all these people who have decided to testify. And so even though there’s no reason why this congressional subpoena is somehow more legally powerful than a direct order effectively from your boss these people are coming forward anyway.


S18: There is this is what could possibly be a legitimate how could any court look at that direct order and say we have directly ordered essentially everyone who works in this administration not to comply with Congressional requests to talk. And how could the court honor that and say oh that’s legit. That really is a fair claim of executive privilege. That’s absurd.


S17: Yeah it’s very blanket I mean you can also see it as an opening gambit right at challenge of the whole legitimacy of Congress investigating as opposed to a specific act. And I am now channeling Josh chafe that’s a law professor at Cornell who I’ve been talking with this week. So I don’t think that that order from the White House counsel lends that baloney is going to hold. But you could still have a lot of fighting in court about the specifics of executive privilege and I it’s been interesting a lot of the witnesses who’ve appeared have noted along the way that they have not had direct communications with the president. And I think that’s deliberate. It’s to suggest that this broad executive privilege claim doesn’t apply to them. What’s happened in the last decade in both the George W. Bush and the Obama administrations was that there was White House balking and stonewalling over congressional subpoenas not involving the president the first case has to do with Harriet Miers and Josh Bolten who were top aides to Bush. The second case in a much more limited way was the Obama Justice Department over the Fast and Furious operation this like anti gun trafficking operation and the Justice Department that kind of went awry. So they had these long court fights over executive privilege and the power of the subpoena. And basically what Congress learned is that as Josh put it to me they can lose by winning. And what I mean by that is that the delay of all the court proceedings and all the discussion among the judges plus the reluctance of the judges to like decide the questions because this is an entire branch struggle all of that just plays into the hands of the executive because DeLay supports the status quo which is not turning stuff over. And so it just like Peter the political momentum peters out. And so Adam Schiff who of course is running the impeachment inquiry for the House Democrats said this week we’re not going to get into a lengthy rope a dope game in the courts over this stuff. And that’s why the Democrats haven’t gone to court to challenge Pompeo and Giuliani and all the folks who are not complying with the subpoenas. But there’s this guy Charles Cooperman who was a top adviser to John Bolton Trump’s erstwhile national security adviser and Cooperman has gone to court and what he has said plaintively incorrectly is like I’m facing these competing demands from the executive and legislative branches I can’t satisfy both of them. What am I supposed to do here. That’s a very novel kind of lawsuit. He sued Congress and the executive branch. We don’t know what’s going to happen with that but his lawyer who’s a longtime Republican figure in all of this Chuck Cooper is also John Bolton’s lawyer. And Boehner said he’s not going to show up voluntarily but kind of invited a subpoena from Congress. And so now we’re going to see with those two witnesses what does happen in court. And I would say the kind of nightmare scenario is the Supreme Court reaches out for this case and then shuts down willing witness testimony and reduces the power of the congressional subpoena. And I think that would be bad for this impeachment inquiry which should proceed with information from government witnesses who are not in. We should have some zone of candor and confidentiality for the presidency by all means but it should not extend to everybody who works the executive branch but also would be really bad going for right. It’s kind of been useful that we haven’t had this question settled in if the Supreme Court settles it in a bad way that is going to be unfortunate highly unfortunate.


S16: So an impeachment law minute.


S4: Yes. There’s also more like seven minutes.


S12: No. That was fantastic John actually I want to jump on that too. Kind of a timing question which is. So what do you think the likely or what. What are the possible variables about how this proceeds. Who wants it to go fast. How would who wants to go slow. What what what what could happen.


S9: I don’t know. I think it depends on how it care how it plays out. If it is a. So let’s think through some of the permutations here. If it is like the previous congressional hearings that we’ve seen where it’s just a chaos madness fast where both the opposition party is encouraged to just kind of throw up gorilla dust and keep everything confusing and go down side roads and talk about servers in Ukraine and talk about Benghazi and do anything to create a. Increase the number of threads whether they’re real threads or synthetic ones. And then you have the majority whose job should be to stay focused on points one through five and continually go back to them and say we’re trying in this set of questions to get at this question one two or four whichever they choose and not try to build their own reputations by being fancy with their questions and their statements or being outraged or doing all the other things that detract from the central case depending on how much that goes on would depend on how helpful this is or not. I mean if it if it goes well and orderly then it’s an orderly case against the president which maybe doesn’t get him impeached and a Republican Senate but which creates the conditions for the election if it’s a total chaos nightmare for the Democrats in which they act as a disorganized party which is almost in the Democratic DNA code then it becomes something where the president says and this is in line with his ad campaign the rendering the press during the World Series. Yeah. You know he does something on uncouth stuff and he’s a little rough around the edges but you know he gets the job done now. Nevertheless. Never mind what the job was in this case because in this case it was to counter Veen American foreign policy views in the furtherance of his campaign never mind all that. It’ll it’ll you know the president will able to sort of use the the confusion or the lack of sufficient evidence to say look these guys are just sitting here doing nothing. And at least I’m getting I’m getting things done. I want to just say three other quick things that are worth keeping in mind. ANDREW JOHNSON When we think about the what people get impeached for two of the articles against him. One was making three speeches with the intent to attempt to bring into disgrace ridicule hatred contempt and reproach the Congress of the United States. And then the next one after that was bringing disgrace and ridicule to the presidency by his aforementioned words and actions. So essentially Andrew Johnson two of the articles against him were for being a big mouth which is just an important little historic reminder that when it’s a partisan process the partisan partisans can make the Articles of Impeachment whatever they want. The problem with that is it’s got to survive in the Senate. What might happen in the Senate I was talking to some senators on the Republican side yesterday who said there is a movement from some of their members to try to vote to immediately dismiss it once there’s some sort of a motion dismiss at the beginning once this gets to the Senate as it’s likely. And they’ll assume it will. Robert Byrd the master of the Senate self-proclaimed actually brought up a motion to dismiss with Clinton in 1998. And if you go back and read what the House impeachment managers said at the time about the motion to dismiss was they basically said this would be a total abrogation of the Senate tradition and history. So we’re gonna have that repeated one more time here as we as we go forward.


S4: Just opposite this hole in my memory what happened in the Senate in the Bill Clinton impeachment trial.


S9: They basic. Well David will correct me here but basically Trent Lott and Ted Kennedy put together a deal. Basically they were they all were like look we’re not going to convict him but the Republicans had to do that. They felt like they couldn’t just say oh thanks. House managers you did a nice job but we’re going to dismiss this because it doesn’t hold up and we’re we’re never gonna get the votes you’re never going to get the votes anyway. We have to do basically the minimum to show that we take this seriously and that we care about the work that you did. But that’s going to leave no kind of foolishness and loose ends that will let this get out of our control. So basically Lott and Kennedy came up with. I’m going on. This is all from memory but Latin Kennedy basically came up with an agreement to limit debate to a certain number of hours they went and did the debate and then they had the predictable vote that they were going to you know they limited the majority and it was a majority for several.


S5: No they there were some.


S15: Yeah. Oh yeah yeah. There was evidence there was evidence and there was. You know they went through the proper procedure but they put a time limit on it and it was a relatively short it wasn’t super super long.


S5: Yeah it was about 10 days I think and the vote the vote was a majority vote to convict. But it wasn’t a supermajority needed.


S19: Right. Right. I did a couple of the reason I was thinking about this is that it’s important to remember that the impeachment inquiry in the House is not actually the trial so. Right. Like Trump is getting a lot of due process for what is essentially like the building of the case for indictment.


S14: I mean it’s not a perfect parallel to the criminal process but there are these two steps and the actual trial part which is where in a criminal case most procedural rights attach is not even until you get to the Senate and two other things that I was reminded of by someone on the Hill yesterday is one during the trial you cannot have a Blackberry or an iPhone.


S9: It was blackberries back in 98 I guess. So they’ve got to sit there and listen all the jurors and they’re not allowed to talk to each other. And Rehnquist was pretty strict about that. So having the senators focus for that long length of time and not be able to talk is going to be a stranger strain on the body on on its own but it’ll be it’ll be really interesting to see if it gets to the Senate or how that motion to dismiss works because it was it obviously wasn’t successful in 1998 but surely somebody will try to gain a few news cycles out of out of that and consider and then we’ll watch Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski and one or two other poor souls be hung up to dry and go through some long anguish especially Susan Collins in which in the end she does whatever is politically expedient for her to do.


S12: One thing to watch out for is there’s this Kentucky gubernatorial election next week whenever that’s when the election’s all right. Elections are next week. Yeah Tuesday and the incumbent governor is incredibly unpopular Republican Matt Bevin and he’s running against a Democrat who is just focusing on state issues and the unpopularity of the governor Governor and Bevin is trying to make it about impeachment. Bevin is trying to nationalize the election and make it not about Kentucky make it about make it about Democrats is trying to impeach the president and it’ll be interesting if if Bevin pulls it off I bet that will embolden Republicans at least in in very red states that in certain places it can be a winning issue. I want to end actually we haven’t really talked about the substance of a lot of the testimony that came out this week but I had a I want to leave you guys with a question which is is it now possible for Trump or another president to do something like this again as he did with Ukraine. So now signal to foreign governments we will help you if you do our domestic political bidding like that. If you do if you do something to help me we will help you. The Trump has sent that as the strongest possible signal it is now out there to the world. But on the other hand you can imagine that if we suddenly see the government of whose Becca stand announcing an inquiry into Elizabeth Warren’s investment in news Becky mining companies that people are going to say oh this is just a dirty trick. This is this is this is a false flag. And and so it will never be trusted.


S17: So it is has Trump put himself in a position where he’s going to get more of these or that he can no longer do it which which is it likely to be I think that in the medium to long term if we don’t make a big clear declaration that this is not OK it’s not consistent with our values as Trump’s new Russia Ambassador. And point you said I believe on the Hill that we are going to get more of this. It will be a behind the scene. It will be corrupt and it will continue because we are a huge power and people want to deal with us. And you know one of the defenses of Trump is going to be that quid pro quos happen all the time in American government of course we’re trading things for other things. What we have to keep our eye on the ball is that that does not mean that the president gets to use the might of the entire government to further his own political personal interests by digging up dirt on his political opponent like that’s the part that’s not OK.


S9: Well that’s that’s exactly right. Is that the means and ends. I mean so what always happens is people who are in trouble on the ends front say oh but previous presidents have said things that are untrue. OK. But previous presidents have said things that are untrue in the furtherance of something that is at least attached in some way to an American value or that is in the furtherance of something that is can be nominally put in the category of the jobs that the job that a president should do in this case. It’s using that technique. And by the way as we all know the quid pro quo is only one part of this and isn’t necessary for him to make the case that the president has has bent the foreign policy process in his in his White House in a way that’s objectionable. But you’re exactly right.


S5: If you’re going to use the tools of statecraft you have to use them for the state and not for yourself Hey get us listeners remember we are going to be live at the Fox Theater in Oakland California on Wednesday December 18th for our annual conundrum show for tickets information go to Slate dot com slash live there’s still tickets available we really want to see you there that is going to be a delightful delightful live show and we also want to collect your conundrums so tweet to us at Slate gabfest with the hashtag conundrum or go to Slate dot com slash conundrum and submit your conundrum there but really it’s a glorious night. You will learn a lot about the failings and in our character probably mostly but you’ll also. It will be it will be a laugh riot. Go to sleep dot com slash live. Wednesday December 18th Fox Theater in Oakland in a series of tweets. On Wednesday Jack Dorsey the leader of Twitter announced that Twitter would stop allowing political advertising or issue advertising about politically contentious issues. This of course is in stark contrast to our friends at Facebook whose CEO Mark Zuckerberg said last week that Facebook would even accept political ads that are lies that would not fact check line political ads and would gladly accept all sorts of political ads from whoever want to do it for any candidate that wanted to do it. And YouTube too which also accepts a lot of political advertising. So Emily is it a big deal that Twitter is turning down these ads. It is a infinitesimally small amount of money that is at stake for Twitter. It is not a big platform for political advertising.


S11: It’s more about the debate among the social media platforms and among all of us about what we think the standard should be than it is about the practical import of Twitter running political ads. I mean Facebook just has such a giant footprint in this world because of Facebook itself and then also because it owns Instagram and WhatsApp. You know Jack Dorsey is like a million people pointed out immediately was basically sub tweeting. Mark Zuckerberg and getting a lot of praise quickly online from people who are concerned about false political advertising. I think a lot of us tend to see this through the lens of Donald Trump because the Trump campaign is running already a false ad about Joe Biden. And so it just seems like that is a threat. There is a counter argument about the way in which political ads especially issue ads can be very helpful for groups on the left and the right that are getting started a way of galvanizing people of making campaigns come together. You know other candidates in the Democratic field like Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders have seen their support really grow in part because of support and you know kind of avalanche of attention on platforms like Twitter. So it’s not that this is like absolutely a slam dunk thing. That’s the right thing to do. But this problem of false information about elections and the way in which disinformation is destabilising people’s faith in the media all kinds of media traditional and social media. That debate is really important for us to be having. So I’m glad for that reason that Twitter is taking a different position and just making us all think about this.


S20: One of the things that I find bizarre about this John is that the if the premise of it is essentially the political ads are lies because if all political ads were in fact truthful ads ever.


S12: Now I don’t think I think it is. I do think that’s the premise of it.


S17: I think the premise is that some of them are lies and Twitter was saying we can’t police. We don’t want to get in there and decide which is which.


S7: Right.


S5: But so it’s essentially saying we’d rather than the other rather than having money rather than having speech including what we all recognize are legitimate and legitimate discussions of political issues and framing the political issues so that candidates can make their point about who they are. It is safer it better for the public health for hygiene for political hygiene for their to be not this discussion at all for the discussion to to to have to take place in other ways which I as a matter of public health as a matter of epidemiology I think is probably correct. But it is it’s it’s a little bit disconcerting for us to kind of collectively agree that that the health of the country is better off if speech is limited in this way.


S21: Well remember we’re talking about the reach of paid stage not speech at all. Right. That’s an important that is totally hip. John I’m sorry I interrupted.


S6: Well that no that was actually just the point I was going to make is the argument is that the rich should be earned and not paid for. I wonder if there is a hazard in that which is to suggest then that anything that has reach has some kind of value because Reagan’s legitimate. It actually it absolutely doesn’t have that. And and if we go all the way back to the beginning of our constitutional experiment the idea of something that gains reach through popular passions is actually to be feared.


S18: So that part of it’s a little trick Erica had to jump in there. I think that would be an easier point to make if Twitter itself wasn’t such a atrocious ecosystem where people are able to gain reach through all kinds of dark methods you know using robots using fake personalities using you know some kind of baleful completely mysterious foreign influence at least with money the money it’s money it’s it’s pretty hard transparent.


S20: I mean I think about another solution to this might be Twitter will allow political ads but the kind of they have to be the tweets have to be super labels like here’s how much it cost or here’s you know here’s who this is targeted at. So it’s very evident what’s going on. But instead what’s happening is you have this ecosystem where there’s all sorts of disgusting hostile stuff where white nationals are allowed to flourish where anti-Semitism allowed to flourish where all kinds of mysterious troll ish foreign interference is allowed to flourish. And that’s OK because that’s somehow like legitimate grassroots speech happening. But this purchase speech is not allowed to happen again. I don’t know that. I’m not saying that the the solution is the wrong solution it’s just it doesn’t really solve the problem that we have which is that Twitter and Facebook are are poisonous garbage piles for destroying political debate and discussion.


S6: I like the Emily’s framing that this is best to be thought of as a chess move and an ongoing act of competition between social media companies and that Jack Dorsey said in his long Twitter thread where were that it was hypocritical to say we’re working hard to stop people from gaming our systems to spread misleading information. But if someone pays us to target and force people to see it well then they can say whatever they want. I think that’s a nice thing to call out but I think to your point David that the problem is that anybody will think that this actually gets at the root of the problem. It is a kind of perhaps good thing although we’ve talked about how it may in fact have backfire effects. But whether it’s good or backfires it’s really not. It doesn’t feel like it gets at the core core thing. One thing I wonder for either one of the two of you is if you were a low information voter who is going to be influenced by a political ad a Hamilton voter if you’re going to be influenced by a political ad and there’s some problem with this question. But anyway stick with me if you’re gonna be influenced by a political ad and therefore it should be taken away from a thing that conveys value because of its reach. Aren’t you going to be swayed by some other thing pretty quickly and easily and therefore the actual effect of doing this is really not going to change the actual environment.


S22: Yeah I think that it will have a small effect overall. That doesn’t mean it’s OK to take money as a company for lying. Political advertising it’s but it’s not an overall solution. I mean I think what you’re putting your finger on is this fundamental challenge of creating a method of incredibly effective communication in terms of transmitting you know messages and ideas over these huge networks but then having a problem of just being completely overrun in low quality or false and formation like what happens when the way in which speech is suppressed is that there’s so much terrible speech that you don’t know what to trust anymore and the true speech. True in any kind. Just gets like completely overcome by that dynamic. We haven’t faced up to that or and we’re just starting to have a conversation about it because it’s antithetical to how we think about our first amendment. We imagine still it’s marketplace of ideas in which the good ideas triumph in the end not one in which the sludge buries anything decent beneath it.


S6: By the way if people are concerned about the about Donald Trump and and his ability to kind of hoodwink people into voting for him again which I think is implicit in some of the applauding for Twitter and some of the efforts to kind of try to sanitize what say you know a bilge filled venue if you look at the 30 second ad that the Trump campaign bought during the World Series on Wednesday night you will see a far more powerful and effective ad is good.


S9: It was a really good ad and it’s going for the voters they need to say it was basically the president touting with you know the traditionally massaged figures but the economy creation.


S18: Yes a million new jobs 500000 manufacturing jobs. We smashed ISIS.


S9: Exactly. I mean it’s it’s it’s your typical political ad which isn’t to say that it’s true but it. And then it has a line in which it says he’s no Mr. Nice Guy. But sometimes it takes a Donald Trump to change Washington and also obviously has the al-Baghdadi news in it which is of the moment and this is aimed right at those you know suburban voters. And basically saying trying to put in a category all of his downsides into the basket of oh well he’s no Mr. Nice Guy but he gets the job done that will be the bigger or more effective saying then then then the kinds of ads that are being taken off Twitter I would guess I feel I can feel myself getting out on the end of a letter on air but who knows.


S6: But I mean I think what I think the kind of the most powerful.


S17: Right. Like that’s his pitch for him. That’s Trump’s life. Like people should hear it and decide what they think about.


S16: But but I think that the more the thing about these Facebook and social media ads and we’ve heard this about Facebook. Don’t not enough of a Facebook customer to know this. Is that what you have is this tiny micro ecosystems each of which is getting its own targeted Facebook ad aimed at the susceptibilities of the people who happen to be interested in those subjects and those may be suppressing the vote and some of those may be incredibly effective but it’s almost that there are too many of them for us to know whether they’re what’s happening what’s going on.


S22: Do you think Emily just switching also sorry can I say one more thing about this. And also to piggyback onto that there’s the problem of how watching the political ads paid for reach could affect your personal algorithm. So then other garbage comes in that’s not paid for because of your interest in the political ads or just the fact they clicked on them.


S18: Emily actually while we’re here around Facebook let’s just talk about their contrasting approach and there is a very interesting story this week Facebook had said Mark Zuckerberg had said in response to questioning from Alexandria how’s your Cortez effectively. Yes you a political candidate can lie in an ad. We’re not going to stop them but that is we are they are have essentially unlimited speech rights to say whatever they want in an ad that they’re paying for on our platform. And so we now have this episode where a man in California named Adriel Hampton set out to create a bunch of dishonest ads attacking certain Republican candidates.


S16: Facebook dinged him saying he wasn’t a candidate himself so he couldn’t. Those ads were not allowed to go through. Then he made himself a candidate. He put himself on the ballot to run for governor in California to create dishonest ads. And Facebook is stopping him from creating line ads essentially saying well he announced that he’s going to lie so we can stop those ads. So you’re only allowed to create lie in ads if you don’t say that you’re lying about them.


S5: Do you think that the Facebook position which is that all ads can all candidates can say whatever the hell they want regardless of truth value is going to hold no for precisely the reasons you were just laying out.


S11: I mean look the fundamental problem here is that we are relying on a company to regulate our speech. And like this is not going to work. Like where is the FCC in all of this setting rules. We have some constitutional law. It’s sort of dimming but it still remains that commercial speech. In other words paid for speech has less value than other kinds of speech. There is a way in which the government could be setting some limits on whether political advertising can be utterly false but leaving it up to a corporation means that you’re having these judgment calls that immediately kind of eat away at the edges of the rules. Well that you just sat and then the rule becomes sort of permeable and isn’t right. Part of Zuckerberg justification is we don’t want to be in the business of telling you what you can see and what you want who can influence you. But like guess they are setting limits.


S6: Can I just go back to one thing which we’ve talked about before but which Emily when you were talking about the you know the conditions the laboratory conditions in which we would best hope to allow voters a chance to apply their reason towards the facts of the case and therefore pick the best candidates. I mean influenced by the enigma of reason the recent book that basically argues that that we we misunderstand reason that basically what reason is for is to justify ourselves and then and then explain our justifications to other people that basically where we’re all just huge post hoc rationalizes and that we do what we do and we’ve we are attracted to what we attracted to and then we use our reason to claim to to construct something that makes us basically be able to look at ourselves in the mirror or go to sleep at night. And if that’s the way we use reason then we’re trying to create a laboratory here in which none of us really want to go in not because what’s in the laboratory isn’t pristine and perfect but it’s because we’re just not interested in that game that game being the application of reason towards facts to make a decision. That’s the best for mankind. So if that’s true then though then that again sort of blinds us from understanding how these social media networks work and how traditional advertising works and how political speech works.


S22: But if that’s true then don’t you want checks and balances and yet to be reined in right.


S17: I mean that’s an argument basically like the human ID is destructive and we have lots of rules in society that try to prevent the human ID in its completely fully realized form from running every. Yes yes. So this is just one more.


S9: Yeah yeah. I didn’t mean I didn’t mean to suggest throw our hands up what can you do. Your narrative is your narrative my narrative is my narrative I guess what I meant was is there a smarter way if you recognize the fact that reason is about post hoc rationalizations then how do you attack that problem. Where do you attack that problem. And it’s just I guess my point well that question and therefore then how does this move get at that problem which it seems to me is the much bigger problem in a in a society that tries to take collective action to meet the challenges of the day.


S22: Yeah. I mean it’s a great question and it reminds we should bring we should say it’s always important to say that whatever is happening on social media relates to and is less important than what’s happening on television still. Like that’s how so many voters taken their information. It’s wrong. It’s just a mistake to leave that out of the conversation and television has its own ways of manipulating emotions et cetera. And then we get into this question of like how do you inoculate people against false messages. There’s some research that suggests that if you tell them beforehand like hey someone’s going to tell you climate change is a hoax and they’re telling you that because they have their own agenda that can be helpful.


S6: Final point is the problem. You’re exactly right about television in the region. And one of the other problems of classification here is we tend to see the world through Twitter. But man it’s amazing how much social media affects the decision made in what goes on and how it is how debates are framed in television.


S11: Yeah yeah. That’s part of what I mean is they’re related to each other.


S16: Slate Plus members you get bonus segments on the Gabfest and other Slate podcasts today. You have a special Slate Plus segment coming because Jon and Emily were having a extremely boisterous just extremely smart conversation before we started the show. And and they just because they are true public intellectuals they’re also private intellectuals and they were engaged with each other around a really interesting topic involving separation of powers. I think I was I was doing other things. I was just doing clerical work. And so we decided because the tape was running we’re going to do that is our Slate Plus conversation it’s going to be a super treat so go to say dot com slash the efforts plus to get unadulterated. DICKERSON


S23: Beth on Katie Hill freshman Democratic member of Congress in California resigned from the House this week after a strange and sad scandal involving workplace sexual misbehavior on her campaign possibly in her congressional office and then a revenge porn incident may have been orchestrated by her estranged husband or by a former girlfriend of hers. Emily do you wanna walk us through the basics of this where how we got where we are.


S14: Katie Hill Yeah this is kind of sad saga right. So it seems like confirmed that Katie Hill and her husband were having a relationship with a 22 year old campaign staffer which is not technically against the congressional rules but seems to fall into the realm of like very questionable judgment especially because there are attacks suggesting that the staffer felt abused by this three summer relationship and there were some you know unpleasant parts of it that made her feel exploited. OK. So that happened you can think about that then there is this problem that Hill’s ex-husband or her husband who she’s planning to divorce at least according to Hill let out into the world a whole bunch of sexualized pictures of Hill which are out there you know without her consent. And that’s very troubling because they’ve been used to humiliate her. And and that’s I mean in my mind they clearly really bad. And that would not be a reason to suggest that someone should resign from Congress. Then there’s a third issue which is that Hill’s soon to be ex-husband has accused her of having an affair with a staffer on the Hill separate person. And if that was true that would violate congressional rules you’re not allowed to as a member of Congress have a sexual relationship with someone on your staff. But we don’t know whether that’s true. And Hill has denied it. So it’s tricky because if the third box if you could check it like yes we knew that that affair had happened. That’s clearly against the rules. There are all kinds of good reasons to have those rules doesn’t matter. In my mind one wit that. Hill is a woman and the staffer as a man instead of the usual scenario of the other way around. If we knew that to be true then it would be really clear that Hill should resign but we don’t. And so then that leads me back to the initial set of accusations about this relationship with this 22 year old female campaign staffer. And really the question is whether that in my mind. The question is is that poor enough judgment on its own. Does it smack of you know Bill Clinton and Monica Lewinsky in a way that’s just like not OK. And so that’s grounds for a hill to resign without the other parts of the story.


S18: And I actually can I add a fourth element which just came to light in the last couple of days which is that it also appears that this is fundamentally a oppo research scandal in the sense that the person who wrote the story for red state the journalist who broke the story was an adviser to consultant for Hills Republican opponents not to say that that the facts in this are necessarily an accurate. It does have an element of political hit job to it as well and to use it repurposing media for political purposes.


S10: One quick definitional thing. Emily the I was confused by so 2018 following the meeting room in the House of Representatives decides they’re going to they’re going to new rules that prohibit sexual relationships between members and their aides.


S6: That’s clean. OK. So but we’re talking here about a campaign aide. But the Post reported that the ethics committee had concluded that that it did have jurisdiction over campaign stuff. Now successful campaign in a successful successful campaign. Right. OK. Right. Because for the same reason the ethics committee has no sway over somebody who resigns after they resign it has no sway over defeated campaigns because they’re not a member of Congress.


S9: But here’s the question I understand about the post is does. Does the fact that the Ethics Committee looks into campaign behavior of successful candidates you could imagine. So that’s fine. Let’s imagine it’s staffed or something. Does that carry over to the coercive nature of a relationship. In other words is this claim that a course of relationship with a working staffer in the Congress is the same as a course of relationship in the campaign.


S6: I think we don’t know the answer to that but I. There seems some lack of clarity there. Setting aside the point you made which is that if she was having this affair that’s been alleged that she denies what somebody is existing on her staff that is clearly a problem.


S14: Yeah. I mean I think the answer to that is that Congress hasn’t decided yet. Like this is a new rule and so they probably don’t have a lot of examples yet to make that decision. Whether their jurisdiction and also their standards are just co extensive in the campaign scenario.


S21: I mean I think they should be right. Well I’m sorry I lost the predicate they should be the same.


S11: I don’t really see why you would have liked the reason that you don’t want a member of Congress to have an affair with a staff member as the power imbalance there. And the same if not more applies in the setting of a campaign where you have often a lot of really young people you have like a much more tumultuous it kind of UN tethered set of working relationships like people are working all the time there in all kinds of informal situations with each other.


S22: That would seem it seems to me that if the rules committee is going to say we have jurisdiction over campaigns then you just want to have the same clean rule and well I’m a little nervous about that right.


S24: Right. You’d say wait a minute what are you. Why.


S18: I mean I think the behavior is just as bad and possibly worse. But but she doesn’t have the job yet. It’s not how should Congress have jurisdiction over something that happened before this person is actually a member of Congress.


S9: Well they’ve claimed jurisdiction over campaigns in other areas. So why would this be keeping Emily’s good good frame in mind is the question of jurisdiction and question of standards. If they’ve already said the jurisdiction relates to campaigns then why should the standard be different.


S18: I mean I think that there could there could be crimped. I mean as an EEOC complaint or criminal if someone steals from a campaign there should be criminal prosecution of that. But I don’t know that that Congress. Is Congress entitled to police its members for things that they do before. Before they’re members of the house I guess. Maybe they are. Well I think they do out of the house I guess maybe.


S21: I mean it’s basically sexual harassment right. And I guess. What’s the what.


S17: So here’s the the upside of extending jurisdiction and having the same standard as that you’re creating an incentive for someone running for Congress to behave with care like what do we lose from that we’re at. This is you know again like Katie Hill she’s not going to jail she is going to be fine but she’s about to lose her job like that is not a happy event. But we she was given this position of high honor and trust by the voter. So should someone aspiring to that job start inculcating a personals high standard of conduct before they get.


S18: I guess she’s being punished by the public. She resigned before there was any official investigation and so so what. Why would I certainly agree that if she did these acts there is some punishment due to her and some public suffering due to her as a member of Congress and she abused a public trust money for campaign. I guess what. All I’m talking about is it is the right punishment mechanism the House Ethics Committee sanctioning her or expelling her for Congress for something that she did before. It seems to me like. No there’s a there’s been there’s good public punishment that’s happening. She’s been disgraced and she has chosen to resign rather than face something more official.


S4: Well presumably I’d rather have her go through this due process than have Nancy Pelosi just pull the plug on her which seems to be what happened. Sorry John.


S6: Well also the House could take the public shame into account when it made its ultimate recommendation about whatever it evaluated her her behavior to have been the the and they could say she’s suffered enough and she can stay on and that’s fine. But that’s a determination for them to make because imagine there was no public opprobrium. So with that then mean the House does nothing. I think the standard question goes this way I think and it’s a version of what people hauled out when they were talking about the Russia matter with President Trump was I think it was Hamilton who said basically how you come to office if you do that in a corrupt way and infects the office that you hold and therefore any standard. So if that’s the standard then the House can say well what you have done after we’ve sifted through all the facts does or doesn’t in fact the office or you’ve infected a little bit and so you’ve been censured and now you can continue being in the office. But we’ve cleansed it and we’ve made this determination on behalf of the body relative to the way you got into the office. I guess that’s the way you would kind of work through how to apply a standard to something you were doing before you had the job.


S21: That makes sense I mean the other thing is that the resigning before there’s any point in procedure right.


S8: I just said fruit of the poison tree or the poisoned trees just to give just to make count.


S19: That’s from the fourth and then that you’re dragging it into a different context entirely.


S21: I guess the reason I wish that instead of just these abrupt resignations and I’m thinking now of Al Franken situation I would like to have some procedure for the sake of the due process rights of the member.


S11: Yes but also because especially if this well actually in both situations I would like it to be clear what the actual problem is right you have a swirl of accusations and improper I do not want Katie Hill to be punished start to have to resign because of these photos. And so if she’s done something wrong let’s like isolate it make it clear what it is and not have someone feel like she’s being punished for something that is like a terrible blow to inflict on her and deeply unfair.


S18: Yeah I mean it is interesting we’re human beings nothing should be interesting. It shouldn’t it shouldn’t be what relevant whether it’s magnetic to you or I and you should. I mean I have not looked at these photos I haven’t read the texts I haven’t I haven’t done any of the kind of due diligence about this because I feel like it’s whatever I wouldn’t if I were in the they on the other end of this I wouldn’t want people to do it to me and I think it just is not it is not.


S4: Well I read it’s not because I wanted to understand whether the relationship with the 22 year old staffer seemed abusive or not and it seemed like the only way to figure that out was to like read the evidence. I don’t think although the photos was necessary for that and they don’t want to look at anything that smacks of revenge porn. So I didn’t do that.


S6: But the the text seemed like part of the case although yeah although the reason you have a case and the reason you adjudicate this in a search in a place where you can kind of keep some of this at bay is that what people write the dishing people do through texts to each other and the claims they make about who’s abusing whom and for what can be you know highly misleading. Yeah right. Because they they are it’s in their interest to define the other person in as horrible a terms as possible and so you would hope to kind of contextualize that in an informal 100 percent.


S18: Good point. That’s a really good point actually I think. I actually think John makes a very good point there. There’s some people used text is much more like the kind of casual speech than it is like a formal document.


S20: And it would be terrible to be held to account for all the things all like the kind of half thrown out half tossed out remarks that one is made in life.


S13: And I agree. I mean. Yeah.


S18: And so to to excavate to to do a huge dig through no doubt thousands and thousands and thousands of texts that someone has done and pick out and cherry pick the times when they’ve said things which were unfortunate or abusive or like you know reveal something is it’s kind of gross and maybe we should maybe we should declare those to be almost off limits and the way that that I think you would declare you would hope that that these photos are off limits or there’s other forms of what are basically private casual communication should be you should look at them only in the most rarefied circumstances with a lot of guardrails around it.


S17: To me what you’re talking about is what makes sense to me is that trial by media is a big problem. This is another thing with having no process like if Congress was looking through the tax and then deciding in context viewed as a whole whether there were abusive elements that were dispositive.


S25: That would be a lot better than like whatever happens to rain down on us from what Katie hills allegedly abusive soon to be ex-husband is leaking.


S26: Let’s go to cocktail chatter when your I don’t know what you’re doing when you’re when you’re not looking at revenge porn not reading other people’s texts just having a contemplative contemplative cocktail.


S23: John Dickerson this weekend we’re gonna be chattering about.


S10: Well you know we often lament the things that aren’t being covered as much while the madness of our age is has its all in its grip. This week the National Assessment of Educational Progress the nation’s report card the NABE scores came out and they and Emily will put this in context. If I’ve freaked out about this too much but two out of three children in American are not. These are fourth graders and eighth graders are not proficient in reading the numbers which is you know awful. The numbers for certain cities since 1990 have actually improved a little but at about 2009 these basically they plateau in the cities Washington D.C. Actually the twenty seven cities to participate is actually doing saw improvement in eighth grade reading but basically the the situation is getting worse since 2009. And there there are a number of troubling lines in this Times piece that where I learned all of this. But perhaps the most troubling line was there is no consensus among experts as to why and so we see obviously two different kinds of responses from the Department education which is to push charter schools and then you’ve got the the some of the discussion on the presidential campaign trail with Democrats. But it seems like that is a huge alarm bell.


S23: Emily what is your chatter.


S14: Mean having a kind of Handmaid’s Tale gloom and doom moment here reading about how Missouri is tracking the natural periods of women who visited an abortion clinic in Missouri the state claims to be doing this to figure out how many abortions quote failed as a way of regulating this clinic.


S11: This is all supposed to be in the name of protecting women’s health and making sure that abortion clinics are safe places. But in reality abortion is a much much safer procedure than many other procedures. The state is not anything like this invasive about end. I mean I just the idea of being a patient at a clinic and giving up this private medical information and then having it turn into some spreadsheet that state officials are picking their way through is just like utterly horrifying to me. And I just do not understand how this is where we’ve arrived.


S23: It’s grotesque. I have two quick chatters. I was just going to one that I remembered the second one first is we didn’t talk about the death of ISIS lady ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi but there is a very interesting detail everyone is talking about these dogs and there is a really interesting detail that didn’t know about dogs which is that the dogs outrank their handlers. According to Army regulations the dogs are given mean dogs don’t have a rank. But but in Army parlance an Army tradition and Army custom the dogs are one rank higher than whoever handles them. And the idea is to prevent mistreatment. The idea is that the dog is sort of the superior officer and so that whoever is training them will treat them well. I doubt they mistreat their dogs anyway. But it’s a it’s a kind of interesting odd tradition. So my other chatter is I’ve saw a very interesting exhibit at the Kennedy Center this week in the Kennedy Center has a new in Washington D.C. has a new arm it’s built an extension called the reach and it has exhibition space and performance space and classroom space and the inaugural exhibition is portraits by President George W. Bush of wounded warriors. It’s called Portraits of courage a commander in chief’s tribute to America’s warriors. It’s about 100 portraits that Bush has made over the years of mostly men and a few women who were wounded in action mostly in wars that the president himself started in Iraq and Afghanistan. It’s plain it’s it’s up at the reach until November 15th and it’s pretty good. It’s actually pretty good. His portraits are they look like real people they feel like real faces you feel like you’re seeing something in them. They’re not the greatest portraits you’ve ever seen but he has a real style and there’s a real emotion to them and it’s good. It’s like a it’s you will get more out of it than you might get out of some other random exhibit. And there’s also a kind of charming interview with Bush at the start of it where he’s quite funny. So if you are in Washington in the next couple of weeks I kind of recommend this yeah.


S4: All right so. Well it certainly was surprising.


S23: You know I kind of went on a lark. It was I wanted to see the reach and it was what was plain. But it was it’s for real. It’s for real. And it’s a it’s a genuinely interesting project that he’s undertaken. He’s done it well he’s acquitted himself well and it says something about these people and about America and about him and it’s it’s there’s nothing nothing but admiration for me. Their listeners. You continue to send us great chatters you tweet to us at at Slate gabfest that which you were discussing at your cocktail parties and this week we have from Chris Anderson at at Chris and HAMP a very funny listener chatter which is a kind of a version of I think we actually did an earlier version of something similar to this but it’s about some eagles that we’re being tracked by Russia migrating eagles and these migrating Eagles were flying all around Russia and the steps and then they went south into Iran and they had these tracking devices on them. And what happened is when they went to Iran these tracking devices suddenly racked up enormous roaming bills. So this this reach these researchers said they didn’t expect their eagles to go that far. And so they didn’t anticipate that and pay whatever you need to pay to get on the Iranian the Iranian cell network. And so they end up with these gigantic bills from these eagles that were constantly sending signals back about where they were in Iran. And it was about how they had to scramble to to pay off the bill and how they had to ask the mobile carrier to cut them a break. It’s very charming little story so check it out on Engadget about migrating Eagles.


S27: That is our show for today the Gabfest is produced by Justin Frank. Melissa Kaplan engineered here in D.C. and she’s in an absolutely spectacular Halloween outfit. Is. She’s Gentleman Jack. And it’s just it’s just such a treat to see her our researchers Bridget Dunlap. I have no idea. Bridget is in costume. She’s in costume as a brilliant researcher but that’s not a costume that’s her real life outfit. Gabriel Roth is editorial director June. Thomas is managing producer of Slate podcasts. Ryan McAvoy engineered Emily in New Haven. I don’t know if Ryan’s in costume. You should follow us on Twitter at at Slate gabfest. We chat to us. Tweet conundrums to us with hashtag conundrum and come to our conundrum show on December 18th in Oakland at the Fox Theater. Go to Slate dot com slash life for tickets for Emily Bazelon for John Dickerson and David Plotz.


S28: Thank you for listening. I’ll talk to you next week.


S16: Hello Slate Plus unusual Slate Plus segment today we had a whole segment planned but then as we were getting ready to start the show Jon and Emily fell into conversation. And while I was doing some other random thing and their conversation was incredibly interesting. So at the end of it we just said why don’t we make this our Slate Plus segment. So here you have unadulterated Dickerson Babylon brainpower.


S19: I have this piece that’s closing tomorrow that has these various separation of powers framers thing in it and the one thing I will say to you which is so obvious but I’d never thought about is this great quote where the Supreme Court says if they’d want if the framers had wanted to prevent friction between the branches they could have created three airtight departments and they didn’t.


S4: And I just never really thought about that. I mean it’s super obvious but they overlap in all these ways right. Yeah. So and there’s a quote there is like quotes from Madison about how we are saying that they’re in each other’s way. That’s not right. But I can find the globe. I mean I haven’t.


S11: You mean separate No apart from Amber ambition versus ambition or Yeah there’s one where he just says it’s the separation of powers does not mean quote that these departments meaning the branches ought to have no partial agency in or no control over the acts of each other. That’s from the Federalist Papers.


S29: Yeah. And who is that because by design or just post hoc rationalization for bad.


S4: I mean you have to go look but it is by design like in the sense that when you think about I mean there are all these examples once you start thinking about it right. Impeachment is an example selecting you know advice and consent as an example right. There are all these ways.


S6: Yeah. Well because they wanted. They wanted everybody to constrain everybody else by giving them a little bit of a foot hold in the other’s power. They thought that would be a check on the power precisely.


S21: Part of checks and balances. Yeah exactly. I just hadn’t really thought of it in those terms. Somehow I guess.


S4: And then then I was also I know that there’s another thing that I didn’t end up writing about but the whole battle we’ve had since Watergate over how to investigate the president is about this can you have the first the Independent Counsel Act puts part of the responsibility for choosing a special prosecutor with the judiciary then we decide the country. They both parties decide like the special counsels are going too far we don’t want that anymore and now it’s back in the executive branch fully. And then that has problems too right.


S29: So what I’m. Yeah. I mean the whole reason I’m going back to the founders is is basically saying you know they thought long and hard about how much would be done by the system and how much would be governed by the virtue of the person in the office. Yeah the difference between the people who make the moralist case and those who make the institutionalist case and both are you can’t. You have to have a mix of both and the problem is we’ve had maximalist presidents like our current one who I went to talked to a bunch of senators about this yesterday and they’re like we never thought they would. I mean the founders never thought that a president with jam his foot on the accelerator like this the whole point of hiring somebody with a sufficient amount of virtue is that they would know when to pull back. There’s this great section in the debate over at the Constitutional Convention where they basically say you know the president doesn’t need a veto power because if he realized Congress really really really wants something he’ll stand back and recognize that like if they wanted that much they must be right to veto it I’d have done right.


S4: But Brian I wonder that and you must be grappling with this is that because the framers also weren’t thinking about parties and so they say yes to that dynamic. Yes you even. All of these things just are different. Because of that everything is different.


S29: Exactly. So they they were like talking about the quaint rules of monogamy and turns out it was Babylon within basically one administration. Yeah. No it’s it’s crazy they when you think about originalism and whatever that actually means they not only obviously work but they not only were awful with respect to the rights of humans with respect to slavery right but they completely missed and they were obsessed with ambition and power and and designing knaves obsessed right. They were freaking out about it. And yet they missed that parties would be upon them within like five minutes. Yeah right. That’s crazy when you see it when you look at how completely obsessed they were about the absolute original sin of man and how that had to be guarded against in government or else. Yes it’s crazy that they missed that I I kind of run by that quickly. But but it’s actually true. Yeah. Now it. Now I want to send you all the hold of the founders.


S4: We’ll tell do whatever you would like. I didn’t know anything about the history of congressional investigations. I don’t know if this interests you and maybe you already know all about it but they turn out to be super I mean this is again odious and yet you can’t. Rely on the third branch to check the presidency. You have to have Congress. And the truth is when you look back at that first of all Congress has been investigating the presidency since George Washington. Like the very beginning of end there were all these questions that actually were sort of unsettled but assumed like the whole notion does Congress have subpoena power. Can it hold witnesses in contempt.


S13: They just did it for a century it wasn’t until 1927 that the Supreme Court said Yeah go ahead. But they just had always done it. And and I guess the other thing that struck me is that there is no implied enumerated issue. Yeah yeah yeah yeah exactly. And also this this. Another obvious but important idea that a crisis especially a corruption crisis becomes if you actually address. If Congress digs into it it becomes an opportunity.


S19: And then the you know so the big examples in my piece are Teapot Dome and Watergate where yes you investigate and you topple high officials but then afterward Congress takes a minute and is like OK well how do we make sure this doesn’t happen again. And so I didn’t. Again you may know this but the reason that the House Ways and Means Committee can now demand Top Trumps tax returns is that during the Teapot Dome scandal only President Coolidge had the power to take to it to request tax records from the IRS. The president already explicitly had that authority and it makes sense that you would confine that authority right because you worry about like people going on privacy violating which is cool. So there are these top of you know the attorney general the secretary of the interior and a couple of oil magnates are all implicated in Teapot Dome. And Congress says to Coolidge which isn’t even the Teapot Dome president right.


S30: He sure right. His heart. Yes from Harding right.


S4: Right. But so Congress has to Coolidge we want their tax returns can you go get that. And Coolidge at first says no. And so then when you read the correspondence among his top aides including Andrew Mellon who’s the charges they’re like we’re nervous about this like looks to us like privacy violations and you know we don’t want to ask for this just to satisfy Congress’s curiosity. And then they work it out. Congress says like well how about if we just inspect the records as opposed to obtaining them. And then Coolidge ends up backing down. But then after the whole thing’s over Congress is like you know what. We want to have a peep. A few people in Congress who can ask for this. And so you have to be the chair of House Ways and Means or the chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee or the two of you together asking for the tax returns. But it was a way of Congress empowering itself so it didn’t have to go to it like that makes total sense in context.


S29: Right. And those moments of self empowerment are you know rare. Yeah but.


S30: But as you point out super necessary. So what I’m writing about at the moment one of my arguments about just trying to draw a sketch out the conversation of the balanced powers is when you see how obsessed they were with distributing power equally every time in the conversation that they would make some determination like how many represent how many people in the population live in a congressional district which was a proxy for how close or distant the member of Congress was from the will of the people. So if it’s a small number of people in the district then you have more representatives therefore you have greater representation of the will of the people. Now that’s great except for those people who are worried about mob rule you don’t want so much that the mob ends up determining what Congress does every time they did something they decide to add the veto power to the presidency. Now we’ve got to counterbalance that by giving Congress more power because we’ve now given too much power to the president when you see them go on and on and on editing this thing until the very last minute. The thing I just mentioned about representation in Congress was actually one of the few things George Washington said over the whole four month period was on the last day. They’re literally about to sign it and he’s like you know what. You’ve got to lower the threshold for representation to have more. So my point is they’re obsessed with each little grain of power to each little branch. If you take that obsession and carry it forward what you talked about after Pete Teapot Dome and when Watergate is essentially an echo of that which is that as the power has shifted and evolved in the American system we would expect and in fact hope that the various institutions would grant and you know this is asking too much but cede power in order to keep that equipoise. And of course they don’t and haven’t. But what you’re talking about is an instance in which they carried on the tradition in the room in Independence Hall which was paid a lot of this power has shifted in this one way. We need to bring it back to two because we’re key we’re keeping the faith of that obsession with power distribution from the original creation and I like that idea of keeping faith with the spirit of the debate rather than the very very specific words because even they recognized that the words were needed. You know sort of constant modification.


S19: Right. It’s the principle is what’s important. And like we may screw up on the details were weird. Just get this is like our first try at the details but we need the spirit to carry forward.


S14: I mean you know in line with that I guess one thing I feel now that I more strongly than I did is that when you look at the aftermath of Watergate and all the really important government reforms of the 70s.


S4: So the Ethics in Government Act but also FOI and the War Powers act like all of the Ford and Carter signed all that stuff and it was not in the interest of the presidency. It was in the interests of the country and really in the interest of Congress. And Congress had just taken down Nixon. So if you’re just thinking about your own institution which is now you know all we have from the Trump administration. It’s it was totally shooting themselves in the foot. But it’s crucial to American democracy that they were well and obviously like they thought the politics pushed in that direction and that’s another part of this is that well and Mike I mean obviously you had the drama of Watergate adding propulsive force to those who wanted record wanted to change the laws to give Congress more power.


S6: So in that sense you had the drama of the front pages helping them but nobody’s able to.


S30: I mean you read the founders and you think man the minute the system gets out of bounds it gets out of alignment. They would have been at emergency panic stations now if you make a structural argument. Basically Rand Paul is the only one on the Republican side now who makes this they talk about the Constitution a lot but they don’t actually do stuff that makes life uncomfortable. Rand Paul whatever you may think of him actually does stuff to make life uncomfortable in the furtherance of you know staying faithful to quotes from Montesquieu. So I don’t know where I don’t know where that where I was headed with that except that well that the politics are swamping the institutional.


S25: Yeah. Exactly. By Slate Plus.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for September 5th 2019 the prolix prorogue edition.


S3: I’m David Plotz of Atlas Obscura joining me in Washington D.C.. Back. Back is favorite gab fest substitute gab fest guest.


S4: Ruth Marcus of The Washington Post Hello. Hello and I thought it was prorogue and thank you for clarifying what would. What’s the alternative for Rog. I don’t know it all so I don’t I’ve never heard it said I’m like what sounds like one of those words you shouldn’t say out loud.


S5: That’s true. Well Boris Johnson is a pro rogue. He’s certainly a professional rogue. RUTH So great to have you back. You were honored to be here.


S4: I am about to finish up Buckley about a book about a book about justice Brett Kavanaugh who he is what happened and why it matters.


S6: All right. I can’t wait to see that really sitting here. Ruth is sitting in for John Dickerson who is hither and yon. Emily Bazelon of the New York Times Magazine and Yale University Law School joins us from New Haven. Hello Emily.


S7: Hello David. Hey Ruth great they are here.


S6: Hi high on today’s gabfest is Joe Biden really the frontrunner for the Democratic primary. If he is can he maintain front runner front runner dumb then what on God’s green earth is happening in the British parliament. We will go into Brexit with a special guest Amanda Taleb of the New York Times. Then Have we turned the corner on the opiate epidemic or not. Plus we will have a cocktail chatter And a reminder that we are can be live in the Twin Cities on Wednesday September 18th at the Fitzgerald Theater in St. Paul Minnesota. I’m thrilled to say we’re gonna a guest a special guest is Twin Cities based novelist Kirsten Feld the author of such magnificent books as prep an American wife. And if you think it I’ll say it such a good writer on politics of fiction the fiction of politics or the politics of fiction.


S8: And she’s going to talk to us about how to write fiction about politicians. And she’s just also delightful company so that’ll be fun. Get tickets for that show there just a few left at Slate dot com slash live again Wednesday September 18th and St. Paul Minnesota Slate dot com slash live what Ruth Marcus is going on with Joe Biden there the gaffe the confabulation stories the erosion in the polls the sense that he is he is tenuous as a front runner at best is he still the front runner.


S9: For the moment he is the front runner I feel like this is the point where you have to intone the polls are a snapshot of the moment and could change at any moment. But I do think we have seen this Democratic field and field of many a congeal field congeal. I don’t know it seems from take out but we know but it has winnowed.


S10: I think we don’t know if we all congeal I don’t know a flock of ducks whatever it is he is still at the top. But it is I feel like he both has persisted to use a word that’s not Joe Biden word but another politician word at the top of this field and it is very tenuous.


S9: He is like a gaffe or two away from not being the front runner.


S8: What Emily what is the tenuous a.. What. Why do people sense that it is tenuous he has had this position at the top really since the moment he entered the field you know except for one outlier poll. He has always been at the top everywhere. Why do people seem to feel like this is not a strong solid state for him to be.


S11: I don’t think it’s that tenuous and I maybe your listeners remember this but before Biden got into the race I think we all not you Ruth. But I think the rest of us wrote him off. It seems like he was too old too gaffe prone too much the past of the Democratic Party. But instead it has been true for months that there is support for him in the party. And he according to some polls does not have like an enthusiasm gap. He has high numbers are very favorable among different groups of Democrats and he is also the person who polls the best with moderate Democrats with African-Americans which is much less true of Warren and Sanders.


S12: So I think it’s a pretty abiding support and preference. I mean it’s sort of I still feel like it’s his to lose. It’s possible that he could lose.


S11: And he has this problem in Iowa which is that because that’s a whiter electorate. He might actually do worse there. But I feel like we should take seriously the relative breadth of his support. Right. I mean Warren’s still polls really well with very liberal Democrats and white Democrats who are very liberal. But she hasn’t really shown that she can make that support more broad. And I also feel like Bernie also still seems particularly to me of the three of them like the most of a niche candidate. So yeah Biden knows his weaknesses but he may also be the person who’s left standing at the end if he doesn’t blow it.


S9: Well yes. That’s that’s the big if. And a couple really interesting things have happened in the last week or so. One is the interesting positioning of the Biden campaign to sort of preemptively lower expectations in Iowa and New Hampshire which is you know the smart thing to do but it’s not exactly an example of leading by strength of well our candidate could still win if he. And as as you point out his potential weaknesses in Iowa he could still win if he loses Iowa he could still win if he loses New Hampshire that’s kind of that’s true. But kind of not true as well if you look at history it has not been the case that a candidate has won the primary. Leaving aside a certain President Clinton without winning Iowa or New Hampshire and that was a particularly unusual case maybe all cases are unusual in the age of Trump. The other thing that’s happening is Biden seems to me to be suffering from a little bit of what I would call Hillary Clinton syndrome.


S13: And what I mean by that is that he becomes his own worst enemy as I can’t even think of how many columns that I rode out of absolute exasperation. And just to be clear I was a huge fan of Hillary Clinton’s and I kept writing these columns that talked about how she was becoming her own worst enemy. And that strikes me as equally if not more true of Biden and the example that I would give of that right now has to do with his really puzzling response to the story in The Washington Post about the conflating of the story about pinning the medal on a soldier who said he didn’t deserve it and why you would not say Oh yeah I’m sorry I should have been more clear it was this and I put this together and I will try to be clearer in the future instead of saying well the details don’t matter if the essence of the story is true. That just seems well I guess maybe we’re grading on a curve in the age of Trump but we shouldn’t. We need to grade on same curve of accuracy as we always grade on why you would sort of double down and make your problem worse instead of better with Hillary Clinton it was she wouldn’t apologize for what she had done that was clearly a mess up for Biden. He should just say oh I should have told the story in a clearer way. I’ll do better in the future and you can move on. Instead he dug himself deeper.


S14: The thing that I find so puzzling about the Biden campaign Emily is that there is nothing vivid about it that he is. He seems unable to articulate what he would be as president why he wants to be president. Other than that he wants to be president and his vision of politics seems so out of step with what appears to have happened in the country over the past 20 years.


S15: Do I understand like he has. He was the vice president for a very popular and excellent president. He did a good job as vice president. He is I think a man of honor and and devoted to service and he’s got his warmth to him. But beyond that it’s this this absence of kind of a verb to say here’s what I want to do is confound it.


S7: Yeah I mean he has he’s a nostalgic candidate right and the back to normal candidate and I think there are a lot of Americans who feel like if we can just rid ourselves of Trump that like that looks pretty good to them and maybe they even go back further in the past because Biden’s old enough to have associations with other decades as well. It is out of step with the way that both the Republican and the Democratic base think about politics and with the much bigger promises and push for systemic change that both Warren and Sanders are campaigning on. But I think there feels like a safety to it and that Biden can just talk about returning the country to normal that you know this idea of of being the safe candidate has appeal. It’s also true that some of the Democratic support is because people think he’s the person who can beat Trump. And so if he doesn’t win in Iowa New Hampshire and he looks editable instead of inevitable to him that’s one of those words that just happened like that right.


S16: I like it though every word.


S7: Double negatives have been bothering me a lot lately so I was trying to stay away from it anyway. If he looks beatable then some of that could slip away and maybe other candidates could benefit from that kind of slide. But I.


S12: Yeah I feel like it’s a mistake that you know especially people who like us like me I’ll just talk about myself who write about politics but not that surrounded by the people who are paying a lot less attention and who just want to feel like they can live their lives in like outsourced Washington and politics and policy choices and I feel like if you’re one of those Democrats Biden could have a lot going for him.


S17: Ruth what is the what’s the Warren kind of counter to this. I mean one one thing that I’ve read is is that well the first three states. I think the first three states Iowa New Hampshire and Nevada are well set up for Warren. And you can imagine if she takes two of those states or takes it takes all three of them that that completely alters at least the narrative about this and maybe drive Sanders out of the race or clears the field in some other way. What is the other case that that Warren should be making that oh this is this is actually my race not Biden’s race.


S13: Well I I think just what she is doing is having a plan for everything and occupying. Increasingly I think the turf of Sanders and so elbowing him out of the way and setting herself up very clearly and effectively as the Biden alternative. Biden’s strongest argument is the electability argument in fact when he talks about why he’s running and whether he would be running if he if it were if he were not running against Trump. It seems not. He is running because he thinks that he is the one who can beat Trump and that it is essential for him to beat Trump.


S10: And that is by the way a very strong and compelling argument to a lot of people including me. But the thing that I find confounding about it just to go back to Biden for a second is his kind of gauzy recollection of the very recent past of oh he talks about how we can have this awake kind of Rapunzel like awakening in the world after Trump where we go back to a situation where Republicans once again frolic happily across the Capitol steps with Democrats and we can all get along well. Note to Biden that was not true. Hello. Justice Merrick Garland before Trump we’d had a lot of conversation during the Obama administration of which I gather that the vice president was a part about how we were good the fever was going to break after this election or that election and guess what. The fever never broke.


S13: Republicans were not compliant or agreeing to go along with Democrats before Trump was elected and there’s not a lot of reason to think that we’re going to return to some happier time that didn’t exist in the recent past. Once Trump is out of office so I’m a little bit confused about why he is selling that case which he kind of knows is not the true case right that you’re raising thing which is just gets under my skin so much.


S15: Which is that the the example that Biden is always citing is McCain who’s not in office. There is no love Lindsey. The only person you can cite is this good editor who is who is basically disavowed by most of his party anyway.


S12: He only did one thing. I mean it was a big thing. But let’s not exaggerate his like amazing bipartisanship in the last few years before he did die.


S17: Do you think Emily that Ruth. Ruth has mentioned that there’s Warren is maybe elbowing Sanders. Do you agree with this analysis that we are at a three person race that really even Harris and Bhutto judge not legitimately in and that everybody else is completely illegitimately in it. And if that is if you do agree with that where where does that support start to flow once those people do tumble.


S7: I think has or Buddha judge could still pop back up. I mean the thing is we’ve seen them kind of Lot rise in the polls and then fall fairly quickly and so that lack of sustained support does mean that yeah. It is like if you’re looking at the polls over time it does look like Warren and Sanders and Biden are the only ones who are getting real traction. But there’s still so much time before the election. Like if I were them I would keep on going and there are a couple other people I don’t know like Corey Booker maybe just because I can’t figure out why he hasn’t taken off more who I would say the same thing about.


S12: I don’t know where all that support is going to go. I mean I don’t know is there really any way for us to know this is where I just feel like punditry starts to become like Meetup at least coming out of my mouth.


S16: RUTH. RUTH Well funded you know so much that you at least live inside the Beltway. You wouldn’t do that.


S13: So one of the things that’s really interesting to me and I’ve been thinking about this a lot is the paradox that the size of the Democratic field seems to have created this almost premature winnowing of the Democratic field.


S10: It was too big for people not to fail. So if and it it’s an interesting contrast to the Republicans in 2016 where everybody seemed to have cycled through and at least had their couple weeks of a real moment here.


S18: People didn’t even get their moment in the sun before they were shuffled off the debate stage and I think that’s partly because there were simply too many people for that to pay for us to be able to pay attention to any of them before they just receded from view. At the same time I think it’s wrong to think that we’re down to three because there’s a little bit of a buzzard aspect here.


S10: There’s people who are circling who could be the moderate alternative to a Warren Sanders if Biden as is possible and I don’t mean to sound so negative about Joe Biden because I really like him I’m much more politically attuned to him than any of the three remaining candidates in the bout completely winnowed field joking here. But I do think that he has the ability to shoot himself in the foot repeatedly and so there’s. If you were a booker or a club a char or anybody who can cling to the debate stage I thought it was smart first entered Gellibrand to get out of it if you’re not in the debate you’re not in the debate but if you’re any of those others it would be premature to get out and because you never know what’s going to happen in politics and one thing you know is if you’re not in the race you’re not going to be the nominee.


S18: So we’re not down to three but we could be down to two ish probably sooner than we thought we would be.


S7: Hey one person who I wish would get onto that debate stage is Steve Bullock. I feel like we’re really missing the Midwestern governor in the story and that because Hickenlooper wasn’t particularly compelling on the debate stage and has now dropped out. There’s like an opening there and I heard someone who knows more than me talk about this I can’t remember where that one of the problems for the governors is that their campaign war chest don’t just seamlessly turn over into federal races and so they’re at a disadvantage to these senators even though their experience as executives is much more relevant to the presidency.


S17: So two point one that was on daily thank you. I heard that Bullock is a western governor not a Midwestern governor. Just note he’s not true.


S11: Montana is the West. Yes.


S17: I’m glad that you clarified but I think that’s the other point about governors is that they represent a form of politics in a way. As Biden does it for a politics which is it’s hard to believe in so it is true at the state level governors still manage to get things done and because states kind of have to have balanced budget requirements and and you do have to run schools and and you know pick up trash and do all the things that’s licensed businesses the things that the states need to do. But again the federal the way the federal government works or doesn’t work these days is does not really bear any relationship to how state governments work. And so I think there’s a there’s a way in which the policy that that belief that oh these executives can come in and they know how government works and they can accomplish things. It’s harder to believe in that now than it was when Bill Clinton or George W. Bush was running for president.


S9: Well except that Washington works worse.


S18: So I think that the fat the fizzling of the governors or the seeming fizzling of the governors in the Democratic field is something of a surprise and it can’t only be explained by the fundraising and campaign finance rules of the situation because it used to be that being from inside the Beltway as Emily said is a debit for a presidential candidate not a plus that people wanted people governors who had had experience in actually running things and being executives and not just bloviating which is the fundamental job description of senators especially in the age of McConnell.


S9: What we don’t actually pass legislation anymore so I’m both surprised and disappointed that the governors haven’t taken off right.


S17: But why are you surprised I mean it’s a it’s a it’s a nationalized election. It’s an election about Trump it’s not about particular executive competence and there’s the sense that actually it’s so much the executive competence piece of it is not that important because Washington doesn’t work anyway and we really just need to get this this this villain out of office.


S9: Well we need to get the villain out of office but we would like to replace the villain with somebody who is in fact executive competent and the people who have over time tended to be able to demonstrate that executive competence are the people who have actually demonstrated it in office and I guess I’m not surprised to find to find governors doing so badly like people that’s not where people are paying.


S18: It might just be the age of celebrity that are that an obscure governor of a Jimmy Carter or Bill Clinton could not actually serve us if we had the technology and media infrastructure then that we have now.


S17: Emily I want to end with you have one last question which is there is a very interesting piece by Paul Rosenberg. Cameras were where it was now I feel like Paul Rosen in Salon about Joe Biden and the persistence of Joe Biden and one of the points that Rosenberg makes which I found extremely interesting and persuasive was that yes Biden can win and it is certainly possible he can win for all the reasons that Romney cited but that it would almost certainly lead to a quite disastrous wipeout for Democrats in a couple of years as he would fail to get anything done because there’s this new do nothing resistant Congress and Republicans certainly will be Republicans in the Senate will have the ability to block anything significant that he wants to get done and he also doesn’t fire anyone up and it wouldn’t. The Democratic base will be disillusioned Republicans will be excited again and that that whatever kind of brief reprieve that the country has from Trump ism which will be a useful reprieve if Biden or anyone else is elected it in the long run it will not be good for the Democrats who need to move forward with a more active and aggressive and forward thinking politics yeah I do think I’m sympathetic to that argument.


S7: I mean as someone who does think we need bigger systemic change especially in terms of thinking about inequality and the way that the economy works and that you know huge and widening gap between the gains for corporations and the gains for workers that concerns me I mean one way to think about this election is that imagine that Trump is like Jimmy Carter so failed that there is an opportunity for a like more than snapping back to the status quo but actually like it’s a revolution like the Reagan revolution. I mean it’s not a real revolution but you know what I mean like a real victory for the other side. And I think that Biden would be a squandering of that opportunity unless he governs in a completely different way than he has so far been a politician or has campaigned. And that doesn’t seem super likely to me although I do flirt in my mind with the idea of him choosing a running mate like Stacey Abrams who is like this big progressive voice and then really giving her a platform. But of course I say that because I’m so in the bag for Stacey you know I just want to say one thing.


S19: I read that piece and I thought Oh for goodness sakes why don’t we just concentrate on the task at hand.


S16: That’s beating Trump and then we could worry about where things go later. And there you have it ladies and gentlemen the split in the Democratic Party.


S6: In a nutshell Slate Plus members like you. What did lucky ducky you are to be a Slate Plus member which you got for just thirty five dollars for your first year of membership. You get bonus segments on the gab fest and other Slate podcasts as well as ad free versions of the podcasts. And today on Slate Plus we’re going be talking about the court in North Carolina that just tossed out its very partisan gerrymandering effort by the Republican Party and what that portends for politics in North Carolina and in other states go to Slate dot com flash DFS plus to become a member today. It is like some form of Greek mythological punishment. You think Brexit will be done and yet it is never done it’s your liver being eaten every day is you rolling a Brexit shaped rock up a Matterhorn shaped hill and it rolls down and falls on Prince Harry’s head every single day. It just never ends. And yet it remains fascinating and horrifying all the same time. We are joined now by Amanda Tabb. She is columnist for the interpreter at the New York Times. She is joining us from London via Skype. Hello Amanda.


S20: Hi. Thanks so much for having me on.


S6: So let’s start with the challenge. One of my favorite things is sometimes when they do Shakespeare and 60 seconds and then in 30 seconds a first in 60 seconds I want you to explain what has happened in this tumultuous week in the British parliament and then you can do the same thing in 15 seconds. So are you game.


S16: Are you going to miss universe. I’ll give it a shot. Go.


S21: OK. This tumultuous week has been Boris Johnson’s. Government has said they want to leave the EU on October 30 first no matter what. And Parliament is trying to stop that. And so they have been attempting various bills that would give Parliament the authority to prevent what they call a no deal Brexit which is leaving the EU without any kind of agreement to still be able to have things like imports of fresh food and medicines and other minor unimportant life details like that. This week has seen incredible parliamentary shenanigans which included Boris Johnson attempting to suspend Parliament through a complicated procedural maneuver involving the Queen. Also the expulsion of 21 members of the conservative party for voting against the government.


S20: Members of the House of Lords were bringing sleeping bags and pillows into the chambers of Westminster last night because they were expecting to need to stay all night. But the eventual outcome is that Boris Johnson has lost his majority. Parliament now has the authority if it chooses to exercise it in the appropriate way to prevent a no deal Brexit.


S21: Boris Johnson has said that there should be a new general election. Weirdly the opposition parties have said that there shouldn’t be one yet because they are worried that this isn’t good timing for them. And now everyone is just very tired. I think everyone working in politics or covering politics in the country was up working until at least 2:00 in the morning last night. And so now people are kind of stumbling around bleary eyed wondering what’s about to happen next.


S5: Okay. Now 15 seconds.


S21: Boris Johnson wants to be the person best known for opposing Brexit. This week has been great for him because he has gotten to do that roughly every 20 minutes. But he’s lost his parliamentary majority and that no one knows when there will be a new election or when there will be a Brexit.


S16: That was right. I just want to add that his own brother has resigned from not just the party the Conservative Party but also from Parliament. I enjoy that. And from Big Brother at least I don’t have Thanksgiving. Good.


S22: So Boris Johnson was technically American. They might have they might have Thanksgiving. He had U.S. citizenship for a while until he renounced it.


S17: Amanda can you. All right. So let’s back us up. You’ve given us the kind of broad landscape there very quickly and persuasively. There was this moment last week I think Time Time stretches and compresses it with breaks it for you to get to what happened last week.


S20: That actually reminds me of my very favorite thing that happened yesterday which was at one point somebody proposed that the House of Lords couldn’t make it just stay Wednesday for as many days as they want.


S22: Their procedures. Somebody put forward that if they kept the debate going until I think ten thirty a.m. this morning they would be allowed as a matter of parliamentary procedure to extend Wednesday as long as they needed in order to kind of keep their legislative agenda and votes open and moving. And so there was at one point as far as I can tell a proposal under consideration to stop the forward march of time in order to try to make this legislative issue.


S23: If you were going to preserve one day that was going to go on forever would it be Wednesday. You to leave now. Oh no it’s Tuesday.


S16: Yeah. Sorry I interrupted you. That was a good interruption.


S8: So going backwards a lot of this seems to have been kicked off by prorogue the prorogue movement by Johnson. Can you just explain again to capitalism’s what that was and why that was so outrageous and was this all part of a deal. Is this all part of a deliberate Johnson plan to essentially explode everything anyway.


S24: Yes.


S21: So taking those questions in order pro Rogaine is basically an attempt. The reason it’s so complicated is that Boris Johnson is everyone believes using some shenanigans to run out the clock on legislative time before the Brexit deadline on October 30 first. So right now the country will leave the EU on October 30 first unless there’s some sort of intervention but there’s no agreement in place about how that will occur which means that the kind of dreaded no deal is on the horizon and everyone is very worried about it. Boris Johnson has done by prorogue and politics Parliament.


S25: He has basically set a Queen’s Speech for I believe it’s October 11th which is a normal thing that happens but carves out about a week out of the legislative calendar so it effectively suspends parliament while they’re dealing with Queen related tasks because of that and because there are parliamentary recesses coming up anyway that would essentially leave Parliament with only slightly more than a week to come to some sort of agreement about Brexit or stop Brexit. This was widely seen as kind of procedural shenanigans in order to run out the clock. I mean sort of the roughly the equivalent of if you were in a soccer game just kind of hiding the ball behind a bush and saying that they need to keep the clock running while you look for the ball.


S20: It has been very controversial even though it is technically something that you know they have an argument for.


S25: Under parliamentary procedure politically it’s been widely seen as a kind of out of bounds thing to do something that violates norms of British Parliament if not officially the law.


S11: So that is fascinating to me. It’s an example of constitutional hardball and your partner in the interpret O’Connor Max Fisher has a really interesting piece I think pointing out that what is happening in Britain that’s different from so many other countries that have had a populist right leaning uprising including our country is that constitutional hardball. Breaking news unwritten norms. It didn’t work. It basically blew up in Johnson Space and the opposition was able to prevent or at least like blunt the effect of this pro road gang strategy by taking back power through institutional means as opposed to playing a kind of game for tit of tit for tat. As Max says and that seems really important I mean I feel like we’re watching this incredible drama unfold and look if you don’t live in the UK and fear yourself the consequences of a hard exit Brexit then it’s all like entertaining. In addition to fascinating but it’s reassuring to see that you know 21 members of the Conservative party walked out that there were people in politics who were willing to put what they saw as the longer term health and safety of the country above the interests of their party anyway. I mean look it’s worth all the drama. But it seems like so far so good right.


S15: Can I can I get there. So what I want to argue with is I’ve been thinking about this a lot and one is I think as somebody who valorous as parliamentary democracy I think I always assumed well apartment parliamentary system always works because a parliamentary you always have a parliamentary majority if you don’t you have an election and then things get solved. And here you have an example where there’s a parliamentary majority it is now it doesn’t exist and so there’s there’s the government is unable to do the things that it wants to do. But I think what Britain has done with by putting the brakes to a popular referendum they’ve introduced a new source of legitimacy in politics a new a new foundation for legitimacy which is the popular vote to a popular vote for something you had a parliament which didn’t want the thing that the people voted for. And so you end up in the situation with with competing legitimacy is around politics and no majority for anything. So it is true that at this moment. Emily you’re right that there is that the that the defection of these Tories and the rebellion against Johnson has stopped Johnson’s parliamentary shenanigans which would have forced this hard Brexit but it hasn’t created. There is no legitimate majority that people can agree on which is able to accomplish anything. There is no consensus within the country either from the people or from the institution of government the parliament which says we are going to do this explicit thing and that we have support for it. And so it remains a complete crisis to me because there isn’t a list source of legitimate political majority anywhere right.


S7: I mean everyone seems really good at saying no but not figuring out what to say yes to. But isn’t the answer to that David what happens next. Right. Like do we have. Does the country have elections and then does actual solid majority come out of that for either you know Labour or the Conservative Party Boris Johnson or somebody else who steps forward. I mean if we end if the country ends up with all this fracturing and still no consensus then I think you’re totally right.


S25: So I think that’s something that is a little bit hidden right now is what the consequences of this will be for the Tory Party because essentially what has happened because these twenty MP is stood up and said they were willing to sacrifice their political careers is a whole bunch of moderates and kind of elder statesman types are now out of the party. And I was talking to Alice Moroney yesterday she’s a political science professor at Cornell and she compared it to kind of trump bifurcation of the Republican Party in the US she said you know this could prove a Pyrrhic victory if in the end what you have is a conservative party where everyone who is left is really going for this populist message that only the you know only the result of the referendum is the thing with legitimacy and Parliament should just be kind of delivering Brexit whatever the consequences. So I think that there’s the sort of short term feel good moment but because this is such a time of change and you know uncertainty in British politics it’s really not clear what the consequences of it are going to be.


S13: My fundamental question is is don’t we need another referendum.


S9: Don’t we need it. Maybe it’s in the form of an election but it feels like the British then the British people just don’t.


S13: Doesn’t the country the United Kingdom need another referendum because the people voted but didn’t necessarily understand or think through the consequences of what they were voting for and their representatives have had problem implementing that ever since. For that reason and we’re being governed by a referendum that might not have a majority if it were to be put get back again to the people it might something that I haven’t seen discussed as much is. That.


S26: In a way we’re actually in this bizarre stable equilibrium of instability where this current situation of it always seeming like Brexit is about to happen and thereby maintaining the Brexit debate and letting everyone kind of cater to the Brexit issue sides which right now are the most kind of powerful political identity is in the country is kind of working for people. I mean I think that for instance Boris Johnson’s position will actually get much weaker if there is a decision one way or another on how Brexit is going to go because right now he has really staked his political reputation on being the person who is fighting for this rather than the person who has a plan to do what needs to be done after Brexit happens.


S25: And so I think it even if there were to be a referendum probably the result would be the same thing I get continued fighting over the details continued insistence that there is some mythical solution out there that requires no sacrifices from anyone. And you know even if the result went differently the next time than you would just have you know the same thing again people saying well the first referendum was the more legitimate one and we should we should go with that or the second one was that then there would be maybe a third tiebreaker referendum.


S27: So what’s the exit strategy then. I mean then you’re just talking about like sclerosis. I mean it’s in some ways I realize that it’s sort of fundamental but it’s also like this huge distraction from actually making the country stronger better more problem you know more what’s the word prosperous Yeah.


S28: I mean as a procedural matter a parliament could revoke article 50 and article 50 is the legal mechanism that means Britain is leaving the European Union.


S26: But right now it seems like everyone is kind of waiting for somebody else to make the decision or there to be some other form of legitimacy for something that will resolve this. And it’s just not happening.


S5: Why is the British political system which I think Americans think of as having produced you know Benjamin Disraeli and Winston Churchill and Margaret Thatcher and Titanic Titanic figures. Why is it producing such as the.


S17: Titanic in a good way not Titanic like the ship Titanic. You know Atlas like gods gods among men. Why is the political system producing such weak parties and bad leaders. Why. Why is that why is there so little excellence in this. This magnificent system.


S29: One thing that I put a lot of stock in is the fact that party leaders are selected differently from MPD. So right now the two main parties have the system that is almost like a primary election on steroids where only people who are actually members of the party not just voters in that party. It’s not an open election like we have it US primaries can vote for the leader and those people just like primary voters in the US tend to be you know a little bit older more ideological ought to have stronger views on divisive issues.


S25: The same is true of the kind of party membership here in the UK and so that means that the people who in effect elect the prime minister are different from the electorate who elect the legislature. And I think that that has produced some really weird outcomes because the leader of the party in a parliamentary system has tremendous power over who gets to be an MP. As we saw when 21 of them just got expelled from the Conservative Party. But the system isn’t really taking into account that they have different constituencies and a lot of ways and different incentives. You know for instance both Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn have the support of cut. You could call them the sort of more extremist wings of their respective parties and are very much kind of catering to them in their policies and their rhetoric. And that means that for the kind of vast middle of the voting public they sort of stuck deciding between going with one of the main parties even if it doesn’t necessarily match up with where they are politically or voting for a smaller party like the Liberal Democrats with the knowledge that they’re probably not going to win the election. And so in some ways you’re reducing the power of your vote and all that is just leading to a lot of weird weird outcomes in the party system.


S5: Amanda last question I know you yourself well I’m guessing judging by your accent that you yourself are not British.


S8: But what is it like to be in Britain right now in this endless state of uncertainty. What is the impact appear to be on people to be living in this moment of this fog that just goes on and on and on.


S29: You know it’s it’s very strange.


S28: It’s a lot of the time feels like I’m in this kind of never ending production of Waiting for Godot where everyone is talking about the thing that is maybe going to happen in the future but no and everyone agrees that it’s incredibly important but nobody knows exactly what it is or what it is we’re waiting for or if it’s ever going to come.


S29: And so far it’s not coming. But another way of life is sort of going on as normal. Everyone sort of tunes in at the end of the day to watch the BBC and see that you know Brexit is still uncertain and still might be catastrophic or still might be fine.


S30: And then they get up and go to work the next day and you know things are just kind of ticking along with a little bit less vigour behind them and a little bit less kind of excitement about the future.


S5: That sounds like a description of life itself ticking along a little bit less vigour a little bit less carry on.


S6: I think I have a motto Amanda to have writes The Interpreter column for The New York Times she is based in London thanks so much for joining us.


S31: Amanda thank you so much.


S32: The opiate crisis has ravaged the United States for more than a decade as many as 70000 people a year dying because of drug overdoses mostly because of opiates. Those numbers those fatality numbers have declined slightly in the past couple of years but it remains a tragedy of monumental proportions. Millions of Americans addicted to prescription opiates. Almost a million addicted to heroin and Fenton all which are nonprescription street drugs or in the mail drugs a case of fentanyl. And there’s this. We’re at this moment where there is this legal assault taking place on the manufacturers and distributors of prescription opiates. I don’t know that there’s a sense that anything has changed but the sense that maybe the crisis is has peaked and is on its way down. So Ruth start with the legal question are these companies being punished an appropriate way. Who should be punished. Why should they be punished.


S15: Should they cease to exist. Should they just be paying billions of dollars should they. You know they should their executives be whipped and flayed in the streets. What what is the right thing that should happen legally and is it happening.


S18: Well I’m not sure about whipping and flying but yes they should be punished and they should be punished for two reasons or in two ways. One is because you need to create a disincentive for companies to unleash dangerous drugs like this in the future. Effective but dangerous drugs in other words these are medications that were necessary for some people but that seemed to have been oversold overprescribed and under warned. And they the companies seemed to have known about it. They encouraged it. They incentivized their sales people to do this and they took no steps to stop it. So it is important to number one dis incentivize them from doing this in the future. And number two to find the source of funds their ill gotten gains billions of dollars in ill gotten gains to help people deal with the consequences of their addiction which is enormously expensive and enormously painful and uncertain process of overcoming addiction.


S27: It’s kind of like the cigarette litigation where you see a company basically realize how much harm it’s doing and hide the evidence for that from the public and continue to make a ton of money and then start to pay at least at first. What is basically like a tiny percentage of their profits in these legal settlements. The next step would be a kind of master settlement the way we had in the cigarette litigation where the drug companies you know there is one big set of settlement payments that you know really could be reparations really could make a difference in people’s lives and provide treatment. And we have not seen that yet. This is just like the beginning of any kind of accountability.


S13: And I think it’s also important to talk about the need for and we have we can’t sue the government and put government officials in jail for not doing their jobs here. But we need to find a mechanism for figuring out how the government failed its people here as well because if you look at the magnificent Washington Post series that got to this DEA database of millions of pills being sent to tiny communities well in excess of anything they could have legitimately needed. Yes. The pharmaceutical companies and the distributors and the pharmacists and everybody else should have known and should have taken steps to stop this.


S18: But also this was it within the knowledge of the government that is supposed to protect us and to protect us from the selling of dangerous drugs and it’s clear that as the pharmaceutical companies and distributors and everybody else involved in this process for what for financial reasons didn’t allowed this to happen to our country the regulators and the enforcers were equally or similarly complicit in their failure. And we need to have some reckoning on that as well.


S5: Do you think this is an unanswerable question I suppose. Do you think that if you were an executive at a pharma company or.


S14: One of these distribution companies that you really felt like these drugs were good and you didn’t you didn’t really know what was going on or did you know. Oh yeah. This is we’re just we’re just feeding a generation of addicts or did you think like oh no but people are really in pain. There’s a huge amount of pain in this country that millions of people on disability and we’re helping them because it’s very hard it is hard to be kind of a willful sadist. People I think tend to delude themselves. I don’t think they tend to act with malice when they don’t have to.


S27: Well there are there is a lot of good that the drugs do in terms of preventing pain. Right. Like that is a real benefit. And I think you could talk yourself into that being the primary purpose of distributing drugs for a while but then I mean we’ve had evidence for you know what like eight or ten years that this is just spun so far out of control and that there are these drugs were a gateway to drugs like heroin that were causing these lifetime addiction. So I don’t know how you could keep deluding yourself without just acknowledging that you were just trying to line your pockets or make your company richer.


S13: Well the human capacity for self-delusion is rather limitless in my view. But as with this as with the cigarette manufacturers the ability to say and and this is a different you make a really important point about the benefit there were no beneficial effects of cigarettes that you know maybe helps you concentrate or peps you up or something. But there are no fundamentally beneficial effects of cigarettes. This is a slightly harder case at the outset because there are beneficial effects of these medications. However the drug companies seem to me to have failed to understand or acknowledge the likely addictive effects of their medications. They downplayed it once they learned it and then they didn’t take steps to make certain once they understood or should have understood that to make certain that people who people who have their wisdom teeth out don’t actually need thirty pills maybe they need five. And but the drug companies has one incentive to sell them 30 because that’s more money in their pockets and so were they knowingly conscious that they were creating this national crisis on an individual basis.


S18: I’m a big believer in self-delusion which makes me a big believer in negligence. But there was gross reckless negligence on the part of these individuals.


S14: I did not realize until I was doing the reading that that it is that people are skeptical of the idea that these are even good for chronic pain. I didn’t understand that that actually if you’re going to have you have chronic pain problems you probably shouldn’t get on something that is a long term addictive drug that you need to find some some remedy that isn’t just taking some pills every day because your tolerance increases and you become addicted and then you’re in a much worse shape than you were before and that so that they’re really good for acute pain is nothing short term or something which is going to kill you but not necessarily for something which is just going to nag at you for the rest of your life.


S13: I think it’s an important point and I heard a fascinating interview with Travis Ryder. He is a medical bioethicist and he was in a motorcycle crash that required him to get off of debt onto opioids and then he had enormous difficulty finding good advice about how to get off. And so we need better work on that and we also need better work on the science of addiction and how 12 step programs that have been tailored for alcohol addiction whether these are the most effective mechanisms or whether as the science seems to be that we need to take not from the alcohol model but to have medication assisted therapies so that people can get on to better safer drugs. His books called very compellingly in pain.


S27: Yeah I mean Fox correspondent German Lopez announced a project this week to try to crowdsource more stories about rehab and all the ways in which rehab goes wrong. Or you know if you’re really lucky you can go right. And as I was reading the introduction for that project I realized I had never really thought about this in a systematic way. It’s like what do we know how many of these inpatient treatment centers really have good success rates. What are the strategies. And is outpatient treatment often better. So I was reading a piece actually from 2016 by not Maia Szalavitz that was published on 538 called what science says to do if your loved one has an opioid addiction. And there was a ton of good information about there suggesting that you know evidence based treatment is much more likely to be medication assisted the way you were just talking about Ruth. And it just made me realize like there is so much suffering and trauma that goes into this kind of cycling in and out of rehab and these heartbreaking decisions that families make to put up all this money and you become a repeat customer over time but you’re also in this like very difficult situation often of trying to feel your way through it of feeling a lot of shame or guilt about what’s happening. And the idea that you would have such little support and that like as usual our health care system would not be set up in a way where it would just take you where you need to go as a matter of course. It’s just it just is so frustrating.


S14: A couple of points on that one is you can understand why I mean medication. This is the problem of opiate addiction is a problem of medication to it that people have been prescribed drugs to treat something and those drugs are then turned and become a drag and that is consuming them. And so you can understand why why the idea that medication is the solution might make people alarmed like medication wasn’t the solution for the original problem why would medication be the solution for this. Not. But I totally align with the evidence based theory of this. I just psychologically you can understand why that wouldn’t. Why that might be difficult for people to. We shouldn’t let this pass without talking about the assault on the Affordable Care Act and the assault on Medicaid and the fact that once you that that part of dealing with the opiate epidemic is also helping people with mental health issues and and like giving them some sort of insurance backstopping in their life. And and those who would those who would strip the Affordable Care Act or undermine the private insurance plans that people are able to buy under the Affordable Care Act and undermine Medicaid are doing some damage to people’s ability to to treat them to get treatment.


S27: Yeah I mean one of the things Maya says is that when opioid addiction happens it’s rarely someone’s only mental health problem. And that totally makes sense that you would have a kind of coexisting other set of issues whether it’s depression or a bipolar disorder or whatever. But I hadn’t really thought about it again in like a systematic way before and it. It means obviously that when you’re evaluating someone you need to be asking those questions so that you’re treating not just the addiction but also looking for whether there’s underlying mental health issues to deal with.


S5: 2 Why do you think Ruth that the United States is by orders of magnitude the country with the biggest opiate problem in the world.


S13: That’s a great question. I don’t know that I know the answer to that but it may have to do with our fractured and individual centric method of prescribing medication. I don’t know if prescription drugs are more controlled in places with single single payer. So I’m kind of flailing in the dark here on that but it’s an interesting question that I think we need to figure out. You know it’s sort of like the gun question right. There are a lot of there are a lot of countries without that have American Exceptionalism.


S4: Yes no one.


S27: I mean do you think part of it has to do with our affluence like you can see this in part just like this enormous waste like all of this money and healthcare getting targeted or channeled in this direction that turns out to be completely counterproductive. But it wouldn’t start if you didn’t have enough money to pay for the whole damn thing to begin with.


S19: No but I think that’s kind of intuitively backwards because other countries that have a stronger safety net of coverage for prescription medication it should be the other day I went to full to fill a prescription and my ensure they hadn’t reached out to my insurance company. So it was three hundred and fifty dollars but once my insurance company kicked in it was seven dollars so it can’t be that in a place that has spotty or insurance like the United States. It’s the affluence that helps you get this medication because I was no wagon to spend three hundred fifty dollars for this medication and so I just wonder if places that have a more comprehensive system of insurance also have tighter controls on access to prescription medication.


S33: Oh yeah I’m sure they do because once you have single payer you have an incentive to be setting prices lower and saving money and rationing care effectively like if you’re rationing care then presumably you’re not prescribing more opioids than there are people in a particular place.


S31: We solved it. Single payer.


S34: There you go let’s go to cocktail chatter when Emily Bazelon.


S5: You’re having your whatever your form whatever your alcoholic form of soothing is. And you were chattering with somebody what are you gonna be chattering about.


S33: I read Curtis Sittenfeld new short story book this week because she’ll be our guest in a few weeks. And I just loved it. I just inhaled it. Basically it’s called if you think it I’ll say it. I am not normally a big short story fan. I find the forum often to feel just like too tight. But these stories first of all they’re just wonderful and also they’re kind of linked thematically in a way that made me feel like more that I was reading a chapter book than I usually feel with isolated short stories. So I totally recommend this book.


S4: And now I have another 200 hundred outside right. It’s so good. Yeah. I feel the same way about your stories.


S27: Yeah. Well you were the one who I read it first and told me that’s great.


S9: So yes I just like to cite the use of the phrase chapter book as if you were kind of graduating to a more difficult reader.


S35: You went along Yeah well you know it’s sort of still remains useful even though I’m no longer in third or fifth grade.


S27: And then my second piece of chatter I’m going to sneak in is to recommend a recent episode of This American Life called ten sessions with my New York Times magazine colleague Jamie Lowe. It’s about her efforts to do a particular kind of fast track sort of therapy to deal with the past memory of the past experience of a sexual assault. And it’s wonderful. I mean I am a huge fan of Jamie’s and this made me remember how much I loved the book she wrote a couple of years ago which is called mental and is about her bipolar disorder. So listen to the episode and then that should be her gateway or gateway drug to Jamie’s excellent book. Mental.


S5: Ruth What is your chatter so my chatter.


S13: I love medical mystery stories and also stories about how how the medical system fails us in some ways and so I was really taken by a piece in The New Yorker by Mike Mariani. It’s called a town for people with chronic fatigue syndrome and it’s about a place called Incline Village in Nevada near Lake Tahoe where a group of people with chronic fatigue syndrome have coalesced because it’s pretty much but only episodically the only place in the US where you can get a drug called and pigeon that has some good effects though disputed for people with chronic fatigue syndrome. And the reason it’s one of the only places you can get it is that the Food and Drug Administration hasn’t completely approved this medication because it for chronic fatigue syndrome which is of course very disputed by some physicians though I have a friend with chronic fatigue syndrome. I think it’s a real thing. And so it’s the story of his pretty much seven year effort to get access to this medication which he still hasn’t gotten access to and the desperate people in this town who have moved there and gotten enormous success with the medication but then have had it cut off. So it’s just a very interesting little story about and compelling story and I sort of feel like with chronic fatigue syndrome we could all wake up tomorrow morning and be even more exhausted than we already are and have doctors that don’t take our complaints seriously. And so I was just very struck by this. So as I am having my cocktail I will be chatting about various ways in which our medical system with all the promise of personalized medicine and individualized DNA testing still fails actually enormous numbers of people with serious health issues.


S6: My chatter is about a remarkable theatre going cinema going I should say experience I had this weekend I went with my father to the IMAX theater at the Air and Space Museum here in Washington D.C. and we saw Apollo 11 which is a short 45 minute documentary about the Apollo 11 moon mission.


S14: It is a narrated. It is simply incredible archival footage some lost for many years. I’ve just never gathered some just restored and in magnificent ways that tells the story of the mission from John F. Kennedy’s exhortation to go to the moon to the rocket taking off to the landing on the moon and coming back to touchdown after reentry.


S5: It’s the most gorgeous spectacular astonishing forty five minutes of film I’ve seen in years. And if you I don’t think it would be I don’t think would be good on television particularly I don’t think it would be. I mean you’ll be fine in a regular theater if you can go to an IMAX and see it in IMAX theaters in general create magnificence. But if you can see it in IMAX or see it in a big theater I recommend it as strongly as I recommend anything. It is it’s just astonishing and it’s it’s just like you will vibrate from how how moving and powerful it is. I also of course have listener chatters that again you listeners you have lead such interesting lives you’re reading such interesting things and you are sending those great things to us at Gap fest on Twitter. And I want to encourage you to keep doing it because it’s just a delight for me every week to get them this week. I want to call out David a man at David a man who I feel like maybe had an earlier listener chatter now that I’m looking your name at David I’m on and David on is recommending a story about a Canadian woman who has been the foster parent along with her husband to 200 children. It’s called the woman with 200 kids a woman named Cindy Sterling and it’s just like a beautiful story and if you want to have a good cry and feel about feel good about somebody who’s done an astonishing amount of altruistic good work in the world for children read about Cindy Sterling and the story it’s really totally inspirational.


S3: That is our show for today the gap that is produced by Joslyn Frank. Melissa Caplin helped here in Washington Ryan McAvoy in New Haven. Our researcher is of course the indefatigable Richard Dunlap who should follow us on Twitter at Slate gabfest for Emily Bazelon and Ruth Marcus and David Plotz. Thanks for listening. Please come to our live show in St. Paul on September 18th go to Slate dot com slash live for tickets. We will talk to you next week.


S36: Hello Slate Plus how are you I hope you are not in the throes of a hurricane.


S32: Hope you’re having a good post Labor Day back to work period. You if you’re north Carolina you might be the throes of a hurricane you’re also in the throes of a legal hurricane. There was a decision this week from a three judge panel in North Carolina State judges throwing out an egregious partisan gerrymander. Emily Bazelon take us to North Carolina. Tell us what happened.


S37: Yeah so the state legislative districts in North Carolina have been extremely gerrymandered since the 2010 census. This is a long running lawsuit that wound up back in state court and the challengers to the districts which were drawn very much to benefit Republicans prevailed. Based on this three judge panel ruling that is rooted in the state constitution and the fair and free elections guarantee that is in North Carolina’s constitution. It’s a tremendous victory in the state for people who want more competitive elections. It’s obviously potentially a victory for Democrats. So far it only affects the state legislative districts not the congressional map. I’m a little mystified about why there wasn’t a parallel lawsuit already in place challenging the congressional map but now various groups the Democratic Party and common cause are talking about also challenging the congressional map in North Carolina. You know I think the thing more broadly that’s so interesting about this is that the Supreme Court in June said basically we’re taking federal judges out of the business of monitoring and preventing gerrymandering. We think judges can’t handle this. They don’t have the tools. There is a kind of faux modesty in Chief Justice John Roberts his opinion about the limitations of the judiciary to deal with this problem. And you see in this ruling as you saw I think in a previous ruling from the Pennsylvania Supreme Court that judges absolutely are capable of doing this kind of monitoring that I mean what I have said all about this for a long time and writing about it is that if people have the tools to draw the maps using you know software and computer technology computer programming you can whip up so many thousands of difference of variations of maps based on how you distribute voters once that technology exists to draw the maps will judges. They don’t have to be drawing all the maps themselves but they can also figure out how to assess it is not in the end rocket science.


S18: So I think what you’re seeing from these state courts are a really responsible effort to try to make elections more free and fair just like the state constitution says so I think one of the interesting things that this brings up is to what extent can state courts and state constitutions save us in an era when the Supreme Court is dominated by conservatives who want out of these political thickets or other issues and the spin a conversation that’s been going on since. Justice Brennan wrote about it in 1977 talking about how we should spend more time paying attention to state constitutions which had been kind of laboratories of democracy and judicial lawmaking as kind of suggestions for where the federal courts and the Supreme Court could go. And now maybe a little bit but I want to really caveat this in conservative as the judiciary lower courts and the Supreme Court are increasingly dominated by conservative judges whether state constitutions and state judges are a potential alternative. One conservative Judge Jeffrey Sutton who’s written on the 6th Circuit Court of Appeals has written a book arguing about the vibrancy an alternative method of state constitutions and to that I would say this is great that North Carolina did this but yes but and the but is that state courts are often and unfortunately politically elected politically appointed just as dominated. Interestingly in North Carolina in this situation I gather that they’re not appealing it to the state Supreme Court because it’s very democratic dominated but especially with judicial elections and the incredible efforts that that have been not attended to very much of the conservative movement has made to make sure that state judiciaries and especially state supreme courts are dominated by conservatives. This is an interesting avenue for alternatives to the federal court system but not necessarily a constantly or universally across the country effective avenue because these are in some ways even more than federal the federal judiciary very political systems.


S33: Yeah. For example in Wisconsin which has a huge gerrymandering problem in its state legislature and was one of the cases that last year went up to the Supreme Court and is you know just really like begging for reform. There’s a sense of hopelessness about using the state courts to address this issue because they’re Republican dominated. That itself is depressing. This issue of gerrymandering like yes it can benefit one party or the other in a particular state. But it is a bipartisan problem. And so the idea that one would just assume that Republican appointed or elected I can’t remember how you got to be a state supreme court justice in Wisconsin but that elect is a lot like dead. OK. So it’s I mean I see the real politic of it it’s not like I’m pretending it’s not the case but the assumption that elected Republican state Supreme Court justices would not be interested in addressing gerrymandering.


S18: It’s it’s dismaying and it’s not just gerrymandering I mean we you could imagine a world in which if Roe were overturned you would turn to state supreme courts and state court systems to effectuate a right to abortion. But that just creates say the reason we have a national constitution and the Supreme Court is we don’t want a patchwork set of laws that where what your rights are depends on where you geographically live. We want national set of rights which you know good luck with that right.


S27: I will say one thing about abortion in this vein though which is that the Kansas Supreme Court decided in this past year that there is a state protected right to access to abortion. So that point of view can triumph in some unexpected red state places.


S34: Okay that’s it. Slate Plus we will talk to you an on bye bye.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your slate plus membership. Enjoy.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for January 23rd, twenty twenty that nobody likes him, Ed.. I am David Plotz of Atlas Obscura.


S3: Joining me, of course, is John DICKERSON of CBS 60 Minutes from New York City. Hello. John DICKERSON, Hello.


S4: We’ve extended the syllables. Now the show’s over because just those two syllables, my John and your hello took an hour.


S5: And also joining us is Mary Winnie the Pooh, like from a tunnel?


S6: It was. I know he says hello.


S4: It was very Winnie the Pooh. It was. He’s a wedge. Baron great tightness that John DICKERSON. That is Emily Bazelon of The New York Times magazine and also of Yale, who is in New Haven. Hello, Emily. Hello. Hello. On today’s gabfest, the impeachment trial is underway. What’s happening? Is it shaping opinion? What have we learned then? Iowa looms. The surge of Bernie Sanders, Hillary Clinton’s shots at Bernie Sanders. Bernie Sanders shot at Joe Biden. What is happening? The Democratic race. And then the extraordinary spectacle of the ruler of Saudi Arabia hacking. Jeff Bezos is phone feeding dirt to the National Enquirer. The MBBS Bezos situation. It’s just it’s unbelievable. It is. You couldn’t you literally could not write that. Plus, of course, we will have cocktail chatter. The impeachment trial is underway, fully underway in the Senate. It will be rushed, although a bit less rushed than Mitch McConnell and President Trump wanted to be. So, John, we’re taping on Thursday morning. Most of the trial has not happened yet, but some of it has. What? What are key developments over the first couple of days?


S7: Well, I don’t.


S8: Hard to know what the key one is. I think the the biggest thing to me is that the the impeachment managers are getting the chance to make an onion interrupted case, which lays out all of the evidence. And having watched, I watched most of it on Wednesday, I was surprised that for somebody who’s been watching this pretty darn closely, that there were things I didn’t know about and that or that I that I’d forgotten about. But then in a new context and that new context is not only the narrative laid out, but then also subsequent developments that have happened since the first time I learned about something. There is a mountain of evidence whether people think it rises to the level of impeachment in the abstract as a question and whether they think it rises to the level of impeachment when an election is so clear and offers another remedy and we can talk about about that split the amount of evidence and the number of different people who all got this impression that the president was was holding up a White House visit and holding up money to Ukraine for the purposes of making the Ukrainian president make an announcement about an investigation, not so much that the investigation itself was important, but the announcement was important as a way to hurt his chief rival. Well, I was I was hit a fresh by the just the tonnage of the information. So that was my big takeaway yesterday.


S4: Right. So, Emily, I guess the one of the strongest points that Adam Schiff, the lead manager, has been making is that the Knesset, that impeachment is necessary because the president is using his power to cheat in the election and that therefore the election is not itself a remedy. If the election is not a legitimate election, election can’t be a remedy if you were cheating to win it. And if cheating is the centerpiece of your foreign policy, were you persuaded by that that point?


S1: I think it’s a really strong way of putting the case. If I was trying to rebut it, I would say, well, that’s true, except that in this case, the president didn’t succeed in stealing the election in that this effort to get dirt from the Ukrainians about Joe Biden didn’t materialize. They didn’t launch an investigation. They didn’t make that public announcement. There are two problems, of course, with that rebuttal. One is that do you really want to let an abusing power president if you think that’s what happened off the hook? Because this seems like a serious violation if you accept Schiff’s premise. And the second problem is that actually this probably has been pretty damaging to Joe Biden because we’ve been paying so much attention to it. And he and his son have been very much caught up in the maelstrom. And you could argue that perhaps it’s been just as damaging and kind of pulled Biden down with Trump, which is like one of Trump’s greatest tricks. So I don’t find. Yeah. I think that that is a kind of problematic response.


S9: Can I actually add to that, which is that we also don’t know whether they have tried and perhaps have succeeded with this kind of chicanery and other places. It may be that there are some trap that’s been laid for Elizabeth Warren or a trap that’s been laid for Bernie Sanders, or a different trap that’s been laid for Joe Biden with the Saudi government. We’ve seen this week, again, how incredibly dangerous and corrupt that government is, or with the Russian government or with the Chinese government, who knows if they are doing this and and thought they could get away with it. What other things they might have tried to do and have gotten away with. But we just don’t know because because they have successfully covered it up in a way that they have desperately tried to stick us to cover up tonight.


S1: What’s happened here? John, do you. Are there particular details that jumped out at you that you felt like hearing the whole tapestry made more vivid for you? Like, are there particular facts or was it just more of this feeling of hearing all the evidence at once, the hearing, all this evidence at once?


S8: Because you have 20 different people, you know, including I mean, OMB, William Taylor, John Bolton, Marie Evanovich, the former Ukraine ambassador, Fiona Hill and the NSC.


S10: George, can’t I mean, all these different people who were not in league with each other, who got the same impression and they got the same impression, which which, according to the president’s defense, was a misimpression. And then there were some people who were just in the dark about why this money was being held up in the first place. What strikes me there is we know one thing about Donald Trump. When he wants something and cares about something, let’s say his border wall. No one in the administration can mistake his intent. Now, they may tell him he can’t do a thing or two, but no one is confused about what he wants to do. And yet in this case, they were confused either. They didn’t know why this was money was being held up or they had any completely different reason. They misunderstood him for that. Any number of people to misunderstand this president is an aberration from his normal way of working and therefore suggests that his proffered explanation for what he was doing is not likely to be consistent with the facts. So that’s the kind of big, huge overall thing that comes across. But one little thing. In answer to your question, Emily, was when Kurt Volker was working with you, the Ukrainian president’s aides, to tailor the statement that he would make, they would release or they would set the conditions for his White House visit in the series of text exchanges that Ukrainians send back a statement that says you will investigate. I don’t have the language in front of me. And Voelker says, no, you have to insert this about CrowdStrike and Berrima or the conspiracy theory related to the 2016 campaign. Anbaris man, in other words, crucial to the announcement was announcing that Verismo was being investigated. Then you have lab partners, his handwritten notes, which came out last week. And what’s crucial in his handwritten notes that there be this announcement and the announcement of the word announcement, of course, is key because President Zelinsky promised on the phone that he would do the investigation. But what’s politically damaging? So the theory of the impeachment managers case goes, what’s politically damaging to Joe Biden is that it gets announced, not that it actually happens. And so when you see the editing of the announcement that the Ukrainian president was forced to make, it kind of just brings it into high relief.


S11: Just that one little piece, which then is echoed and re echoed by all these other people who’ve testified that this was the intent of the policy. And so that was just one way in which the small thing made the larger case.


S4: Emily, one of the centerpieces of the defense of President Trump’s defense is the claim that that there was no crime and absent a crime and not just a crime, a crime that actually hurts the public. Impeachment is not a legitimate exercise or congressional authority. That seems farfetched. But I wondered what you are as our resident legal scholar make of it.


S1: Yeah. I mean, as Frank Bullman, who’s a law professor who’s written a lot about impeachment, said, it’s constitutional nonsense. It’s really been bothering me this week. And I think here’s the reason why. So I feel like there are surely more, but at least three ways that the president’s team could be responding to this. They could be trying to question the facts. We’re not seeing a lot of that. I mean, they haven’t mounted their defense, but that wasn’t really their approach in their brief. They could say, okay, this isn’t great, but it doesn’t rise to the level of impeachment. Or they could say this isn’t an impeachable offense. And Congress has no right to investigate. And that’s the tack they’ve taken. And it’s really disturbing as a matter of setting precedent.


S5: I mean, first of all, I think is wrong as a matter of constitutional history and separation of power. But it also strikes at the heart of Congress’s power to try to hold the president accountable. And I just find it so dismaying to hear this argument coming from some people who are well-known lawyers. I mean, foremost among them, Alan Dershowitz from Harvard Law School, who I feel like is changing the channel from a bad moment with Jep, with his associations with Jeffrey EPSTEIN, and also just like dying to be in the limelight. And he is making an argument that contradicts the stance that he himself took during the Clinton impeachment. It’s an argument that basically every single worth, every single legal expert worth their salt has said this is risible, like not just like, oh, that’s interesting. And there’s another way to think about it. But literally all this is one of those cases where all of the history and precedent from the framers four-word from before the framers back to the British is in the other direction and it’s in the other direction for a really important reason.


S1: You know, the idea of impeachment is that because especially given the Justice Department’s stance that the president can’t be prosecuted for criminal offenses, Congress has to have another way of thinking about his conduct. Like there has to be some check that we have beyond elections, or at least that’s the way the constitution is framed. And so if you’re going to take away abuse of power, which of course, was part of the Nixon and the Clinton impeachment cases, you’re really landing in this place in which you risk the president being totally unaccountable.


S11: And if you read the debates in the summer of 1787, somebody apart from the specifics on impeachment, which are a little mushy. They are obsessed to the point of really being mind bendingly boring about the balancing of power. And every time a tiny little grain of sand gets put on the congressional side, there’s a huge long discussion about balancing that with more powers on the presidential side or in the executive side and vice versa. The idea that people who were on such a hair trigger and so fearful that when you handed over power to an executive, which would have been unheard of 10 years earlier when they were fighting a war against one that they would think abuse of power was not a part of of this remedy is it really strikes just from that perspective, really seems way out of bounds.


S9: I’m reminded I’ve talked about this on the show before and I credit Madoc Lacy as who’s the person who pointed me to it originally. This Yale political scientist now dead one Lind’s, who wrote about why the American form of government is so unstable, and that if you look around the world, governments that are constructed like the United States do not survive and would be the reason fundamentally that you have these two different sources of popular legitimacy. One source is the election of the president and the popular well, I mean, fitt, we can even bake in separate point, which is that you don’t even necessarily have popular intimacy with the president if you have a non-majority majority election, but whatever. And then you have a Congress, in fact, a divided Congress where you have two different sources of legitimacy, a popular, popularly elected Senate, a popularly elected house, each of which could have different majorities. And you end up with this fundamentally unstable situation where each of them has power in each of them can Klint can claim a form of legitimacy. And for much of the United States, its history, this has been OK. And they have balanced each other out for a variety of luckie reasons, except for the period during the civil war, it managed to work. It is no longer working because the legislature has shown itself willing to cede to the executive mammoth amounts of power and to not hold the executive accountable. It can be late. One hundred and fifty percent, basically maybe 94 percent at the feet of the Republicans in Congress who have declined to act in the way that they are supposed to act. Of course, the president is a is a malfeasant, and he’s a villainous person who has committed crimes both against the state in the form of high crimes. And he’s probably committed regular crimes, too. But it is un conscionable what the Republicans in the legislature are doing and and they are the ones who are going to have to live in the shame of this. When we end up with a with an executive dictatorship, which is where we’re headed in this country, we are going to an executive dictatorship. We basically have an executive dictatorship because of an executive who was not responsive. And this impeachment is a last effort to hold the executive accountable. But it is not going to work because the Republicans in Senate will not support it.


S11: Yeah, sure, they have the the majority in the Senate in particular has a responsibility to I mean, a self-respecting member of the legislature should laugh at the idea that abuse of power cannot be checked by Congress just as a kind of self-respecting member of the club, regardless of the specifics of the case, because it’s a self denuding argument. It basically means Congress has no has no power in a system in which the powers are supposed to be shared separate apart from what faces Republicans now to stand up for their for their Congress. The ceding of power to the executive has been a thoroughly bipartisan thing, eh? There were lots of examples of of the admittedly the Obama administration doing it. Obviously, whenever you talk about examples, you have to talk about different in kind. So this is, you know, putting a lot of power in the administrative state as a part of the Affordable Care Act is a different thing than what is alleged here on Ukraine. And so I’m not suggesting that they are equivalent, but the ceding of power has happened over generations. And in fact, one of the arguments for Elizabeth Warren is Warren’s candidacy is given that so much power has been ceded and we can talk about this in our next topic. But given that so much power has been ceded to the executive, hire somebody in that job who knows exactly how to work that system. Forget about trying to build bipartisan consensus in Congress. It’s broken. We need to work the system with its administrative levers as best as possible, maybe even expand those powers to get what we want, which may be somebody’s preferred argument. But just from a perspective of balance of powers would only make the balance of powers more unequal than it is today and accept and exacerbate that identify.


S9: I don’t think that’s a I don’t I’m not sure that’s a fair characterization of what Warren the case for Warren is. I think there’s a huge component of political reform as part of that. There’s an idea which is that this will be accompanied by a political reform expansion of. Franchise, you know, expansion of adding voting rights, things like that, which are dealing with corruption.


S5: I mean, that’s her first bill. She’s so. Anyway, so here’s a question. I think that part of the problem we’re facing right now goes to polarization, which is, you know, related to this question of Congress’s power versus the president. But it’s also it’s own phenomenon. And I wonder if we’re in a world in which impeachment is just not going to happen, or at least removal from office won’t happen unless we have a president of a different party from both houses of Congress. And in some ways, that’s not surprising since you need two thirds of the Senate for removal. So you need this like big lift that probably you’re not going to have from just one party. But I just wonder, in our era of polarization, whether impeachment is just broken, like whether it’s one more part of the Constitution, which is not really doing what it’s supposed to do anymore. And I think I’ve been particularly troubled by that watching because this is has the trappings of a trial and a court proceeding. But it’s not that like the Senate is not the jury. They’re also making the rules for the court. And I I bridle at the idea that it kind of has this veneer of due process and fairness and rules about evidence when in fact, it’s this deeply partisan affair in which the Senate by majority vote can overrule any kind of ruling that Chief Justice Roberts decides to make.


S8: The power of impeachment should be incredibly hard to use, incredibly limited.


S12: But in a time where you don’t have the checks and the conversation we were just talking about, when you don’t have the normal checks on power. A lot of the ways in which previous executives have overstepped their bounds, the people who’ve felt trampled have gone to court, had their case heard and in and in many cases, the executive has been pinback. And so the normal checks and balances work, leaving impeachment for the most extraordinary, extraordinary case, which, you know, in the way they designed it, should be super, super extraordinary. But the problem with the partisan ship that you talked about, Emily, is we also had this situation where voting is in Senate races is so much more closely tied to the fortunes of your president or the fortunes of national issues. And since presidents are the biggest political actor in national affairs, the health of your president and the boosting of your president tends to determine how you’re gonna do in your Senate race. And so it’s not just the left right, but it’s the cohesion and stickiness within a party. The fortunes of individual senators to the future and fortunes of the of the president when Nixon was elected. Half the states that voted for him had Democratic senators. Now that number is closer. Now we have states that basically vote red or vote blue. And that’s one of the underlying issues that all that really makes it difficult here to ever impeach because of that adhesion.


S13: Slate plus members. Lucky you, lucky you, lucky you. You get bonus segments on so many Slate podcasts, including ours because Slate.com flushed gap. Plus you can sign up to become a member today. It’s very cheap. It’s the new year. Do it. Get a membership for a year. And today’s Slate Plus segment for us is going to be very theological, very theological, very grand. We’re going to discuss what elements we would put into religions that we were designing. If any of the three of us gets the chance to design our own religion in the future, become a Godhead, a prophet. What elements are going to be in our religion? This is a idea proposed by one of Emily’s children, and I believe it’s going to philly.com flood gaffes plus today.


S9: So much fun drama in the Democratic race or drama, maybe not fun. Depends who you are. You have Hillary Clinton whacking Bernie Sanders say nobody likes him. Sanders as people are whacking Joe Biden as corrupt. The New York Times bafflingly picking both Elizabeth Warren and Amy Klobuchar in a reality TV style endorsement that I think did not help either of them. Michael Bloomberg buying every TV ad in America and steadily proving that perhaps you can buy the election. And then polling that suggests, you know, speaking to Bernie Sanders that he is just doing really well. Things are going really well for him. So, John, where we stand, we’re a couple of weeks out, two weeks out, three weeks out from from Iowa. Where do we stand on on the state of the race there and in the state or race overall quick?


S11: Well, I think the Iowa caucuses conclude, by the way, on the 3rd of February. Where do we stand? It’s a good joke. It’s a big, massive jumble. I would like to rise in partial defense of The New York Times as a way of talking about the race and not so much. Wow. Time. Can’t wait to hear this one. Hear it.


S8: So believe me, I’ve had critiques. But I think part of what they have put their finger on is an unsettled thing that I that should be pushed more to the front, because I think it gets at some of the questions we were just talking about, which is are we in a time of repair of existing institutions or are we in a time of radical solutions? And by that I mean both the systemic problems with the machine of American government and also what is the temperament of the nation.


S11: I still think that that after if Donald Trump is to serve just one term, I think the appetite in the country for massive change in the other direction, he’s not going to be super high. There is a symbiotic relationship between the desires of the country and what a leader can do. Leaders can’t just run up the hill if people aren’t going to follow them. And so figuring out that tension explains that what kind of candidate you want and the desired outcome you have. There’s a lot of steps in between that are required first as winning the election and then is working through the system to get there. And so people often focus on what they want their desired end state, which is important, but it’s not the only issue. And what the Times is wrestling with is, is both what makes a person electable in this moment. But then also when they get in the job, how can they how can they govern? Is it a world where you can build bipartisan consensus for things when you talk about Elizabeth Warren’s first effort being corruption, reform? Well, okay. But our Republican senators really gonna give her her first victory the minute she gets in office. They’ll change the corruption legislation into being about something else. Or maybe not. Maybe the country will have roundly defeated Donald Trump and there will be a huge revolt against the Trump idea. And Republicans will be rushing to find a safe space and corruption. Anti-Corruption is like motherhood and apple pie. And and it’ll be fine. But how you see those two things determines whether you think that Elizabeth Warren is the person for the day or not. And I think that’s all very much unsettled. And so the times in making their choice, I think Ken has a defensible case that these are the thing. This is the way you need to focus on the frame of the debate first before you can even pick the candidates. Since we haven’t settled on the frame, here we are.


S9: That is that’s weak, man. The point of an editorial and it’s so clear from the way they constructed it in this whole reality TV spectacle, which they, you know, which was a bit much really is that they are trying to make it something that draws attention.


S14: And that matters and that makes a difference. And the only time an editorial endorsement matters is when it is emphatic and well-timed and signals voters that they are that this is a choice, that they can now it’s now safe for them to make or it validates the choice that can make for the times to do this, to to denude it to to strip their own endorsement of any power and any meaning is an act of such stupidity. I can’t I am shocked that the Times did that. I like it would’ve been much better, much better to pick Tom Stier, much better pick Tulsi Gabbard than to give this this incredibly not not to say that what you just said is wrong. John, it’s very well thought out. And it is true there are these frames for looking at the election and ways of thinking about it. The times, if it’s if it’s taking its responsibility of endorsing seriously, should say yes. And given all of that, the frame that is more important, the way that I know that we believe you should look at it, is this this way and therefore we endorse Amy Klobuchar or that way. And therefore, we endorse Elizabeth Warren and make a difference. And instead, they’ve made this endorsement, which will help neither Warren nor Klobuchar and embarrasses them. And and it’s it’s just it’s infuriating to see them waste. It’s like it’s it’s like they’ve been. Given a they’ve been given a a, you know, a thousand dollar truffle and they’ve and they like put it in a safe beans or something. Yeah.


S8: Can I stupid can can I modify my view and ascribe to what you just said, which is that OK, say all that stuff I just said, which I all still agree with. But then faced with that view about the frame, if you believe that the frame is still at issue, then you got to pick one. Then you’ve got a almost at Elmos candidate agnostic. You think that truly is one of the unresolved issues in the campaign then? Because you’re not just any old analyst, because you’re actually opinion writers and because you have a different role in them in the food chain that that you’re that you can’t give up the picking function of your job. You have to pick. And if you think it’s about picking the frame, then fine, pick the frame. But you can’t you can’t duck your obligation. I I’m persuaded by part of your case.


S15: Amillia, that’s where I come out to. I also think the timing was odd, especially if you’re not you’re hesitating about making a choice, like let it play out a little longer. Let’s see how they do in some of these primaries and you can take that into account, too.


S9: Emily, one of the other things that happened this week was that Hillary Clinton took a shot at Bernie Sanders. I guess you’d taken it a little while ago, but she stood by her shot saying that nobody likes them and more or less he doesn’t get anything done. Which, to be fair to Bernie Sanders, is the job of a senator is to not get anything done.


S14: I would actually. The interesting thing to me about Sanders is I think would be a bad president. But he Sanders has logit changed the tenor of the debate in this country. He has completely changed the way people talk about certain issues, particularly on the Democratic side. And so the idea that he hasn’t gotten anything done is a bit misleading.


S9: He has gotten a huge amount done. And that he is he’s moved the debate 100 yards to left of where it was. And that’s a lot. Even though he hasn’t necessarily gotten bills passed. But is it is her criticism good news for him? Is it a helpful for him?


S15: I just think she is really misunderstanding her job right now. And I don’t see any upside for her or for the country in this kind of intervention. Like her job is to be as statesmanlike and gracious and helpful to the Democrats as possible. And this is the opposite of that. And it makes this all about her. Returns us to the sniping, a bitterness of 2016 in a way that I think raises fears that some voters are not over that or are just going to feel like, you know, the Democrats are just as at odds with each other. And so like a pox on both their houses. I just really think this was unwise, like deeply unwise. So I don’t really care whether the criticism of Bernie is like fair or not.


S1: Doesn’t seem fair to me, really. I mean, it seems like it’s very much through Hillary Clinton’s own lens and prism. But I just mostly think, like, this is not the moment for her to be doing this.


S9: I was on the receiving end of a Bernie Broe last weekend. I’d never been on the receiving end of a burning bra before.


S16: How’d that go for you? It was that that was quite an experience. But I need to sell.


S5: Well, what was he doing that made him a Bernie Broe as opposed to just a Bernie supporter?


S16: Oh, I’m just using the term was it was a young male. Like, was he being obnoxious? No. I hope. Perfect.


S9: I’m perfectly, perfectly nice, smart young person, truly. But it was it was so he was so emphatic and and so like, you know, I turned left and I got hit in the face there and I turned right. And then I got, you know, kicked in the shin and I walked out of the room and and it was still going on. It was just the kind of the flame, the flame burner. But I need one of you. I need to smarty-pants like one of you to explain to me is the Bernie Sanders theory that he expands the electorate or the Bernie Perot theory that he expands the electorate and gets and gets this whole new group of people who would otherwise not vote or would be. Yeah, wouldn’t vote or would be even maybe Trump ish. Is that a more or less compelling than the theory that he he alienates all these people, namely suburban women maybe who are disillusioned with Trump and his grossness. But but do want a safe pair of hands. I mean, like is is the theory. Do we. Do we have anything to show that once one theory is correct or not?


S12: Jon, I think the closest you can get is if you is the people who argue, look, these elections can be figured out by. Or it can be determined by three thousand people in seven states. And those Midwestern states tend to have a constituency that is just receptive or receptive to a candidate like Biden Club, H.R. Boobage Edge, then or then Bernie Sanders, both by the makeup of the electorate and then also the fact of the way Donald Trump would run the campaign, that that since this campaign will will certainly be defined by negative partisanship, the way the last campaign was defined by negative partisanship that passed that, that people that the largest fear that that he can conjure, he’s gonna do it no matter who the candidate is. And he’ll largely use all the same attacks, socialism and open borders and crime and the things that will make people the most fearful. And when he’s trying to do is make those suburban women the most fearful, because if they’ve left him, they they might just not turn out. He needs to make them fearful enough to turn out in opposition to. And the argument goes that they would be more likely to be an opposition to a Bernie Sanders than to someone like Joe Biden.


S1: I mean, I feel that’s the trade in all of this, though.


S15: I mean, trade in those Midwestern states is really important given all the jobs have been lost to, you know, that have gone offshore. And Biden actually has a bad record on trade from the point of view of people who feel like they’ve lost out from America’s trade deals, whereas Bernie has a better record.


S13: I don’t think there are 10 Americans who vote on trade. I really don’t think nobody votes on right. I think it is an issue that affects math of numbers of people and it is, you know, and trade policies are enormously important. But I actually don’t think it if they voting issue for anybody, because it doesn’t it doesn’t have emotional valence in the same way that immigration seems to or abortion rights seems to be cultural issues.


S1: Maybe the best example of people voting their values instead of their class interest rates become such a theme of American politics. All right.


S12: I think if trade was ever going to play a role, it will play a role in this in this election. However, I generally subscribe to what David’s saying. To the extent that people talk about trade, it’s often a label. They’re sticking on something else, whether it’s the inequities in inequality in the system, because trade tends to be supported by, you know, employers who have stuff made overseas and and the American jobs suffer as a result or just a general indifference to the working man and so forth. There’s a lot of this locked up in values and identity that is disconnected from economic interests. And so the idea that people would be moved just by the better articulation of an economic interests argument is I think is not supported by a lot of the political science research.


S15: Let me make a case for Bernie, though, which is that he has this incredibly ardent support. Now, it hasn’t grown enormously. It the big question is whether it could when Democrats have relied on the past, on the notion of turning out voters who don’t usually vote, i.e., young people and more Latino voters, that has failed them. And the demographics haven’t shifted enough yet that it looks like it would be easy to change those margins. And yet there is this real core of enthusiasm. What I wonder about is the sort of toxic nature of some of the expression of that enthusiasm. So it’s great to be for your candidate.


S5: But the demonizing in the last couple weeks of Elizabeth Warren, the attacking of, you know, other people who are lefty and liberal, but not like the die hard true Bernie supporters like that seems problematic to me because then you’re just not you’re not making people feel like welcome in a big tent. You’re making it into this purity test. I don’t think that’s about Bernie. By the way, and I don’t think it characterizes a lot of his supporters. But it is true. You know, on Twitter, for example, which is not the world, but it also does relate to how journalists who are on Twitter a lot think about politics.


S8: And I think we are likely to have invited some of it by the analysis. We just we just engaged in. I’m sure there is a there there is a there is a difference. It might be small, but there is a difference between between the way his supporters respond to things and the way other candidates supporters do. And and that I mean, that’s just that is the case. And it seems to me. And but what you say, Emily’s is also true, which is that he has a group of people and supporters who represent just the kind of passion that he says will be transformative in the nation. I think the the the trick, though, and where it where it has a big hurdle is that that that has a ceiling. It has a ceiling not unlike President Trump’s ceiling in the sense that it is deep and intense and really believes in him in a passionate way. But but that that’s not that can’t be transition to other people or that you can’t just you have to do another trick to get him to grow that that group of supporters. And that’s what you would need to affect the kind of change in the in the math formula that he argues he’s going to be able to use to get big things passed through Congress, which has created big, huge national revolution that’ll put all this pressure on Washington. And that’s where I think his his argument has some has some trouble.


S9: So I want to I want to close us out just quickly nodding at two interesting candidates. One. One seemingly sliding down the other. Climbing up. Mayor Pete does seem to be waning. And Mike Bloomberg, you know, he’s got he’s he’s bought his way. He’s 180 million dollars of TV buy, bought his way to decent support in national polls, but not in the early states. John, do you think that is the mayor Pete situation that he is? Is that now over the mayor? Pete, we’ve gone and we write him off and sort of start redistributing his people elsewhere. And where do they go? That’s number one. Number two, is is the is Bloomberg does it feel like Bloomberg actually is in a legit position to do something, assuming that Sanders comes strong out of New Hampshire and Iowa?


S8: I think the biggest problem is that he’s got he’s got Joe Biden in front of him. I mean, if it’s an alternative between if you if you take this the the slot that the times, you know, the two slots that The Times identified, which I think are right then booted, George, either has Biden or kilo-bits out in front of him, even though Klobuchar isn’t showing up in the polls at all. But she is in the elite arguments. So he’s getting you know, he’s he’s he’s getting kind of pressure from two places. So and he’s got a problem which he hasn’t been unable to solve with the African-American community. And fairly or unfairly, one of the things that, you know, happens in races is you get tagged with with a problem and then it’s your job to try and find a solution to that. And it it may be really hard and quirky and weird to do, but then again, so is the job that you’re asking to be in. So he hasn’t really solve that. So that scene that I think is a problem, both a real problem, but it’s also a problem is people engage in punditry for the purposes of picking the most electable. They think see weakness there. I’m not sure what to make of the Bloomberg thing other than name I.D.. You know, matters a lot when people see a name and hear a name a lot. You know, they you you tend to rise in the polls. I think he’s, you know, in a couple of future episodes, we’ll talk about, you know, is there really a path there if if if the delegates get really split up in the first series of contests? Does he get another look? I think one thing that I would just make a tiny little plea for is it was really going back to The Times editorial briefly when they talk about Elizabeth Warren on domestic affairs. They talk about her precision and understanding of the intricacies of how to get things accomplished on the domestic sphere, both through the administrative state and also through legislation. They have great. They put great power and in her talents. Then when it comes to foreign policy, they say that she, you know, speaks eloquently. Okay. And then moves on to the next issue. So the balance of issues she’s going to have to deal with are going to be more foreign than domestic. And just speaking eloquently about it would be like saying they you know, the candidate speaks eloquently about policy issues. You wouldn’t stop their domestic policy issues. You wouldn’t stop there. You’d say, well, now we have to determine whether the Sanders approach is better or the Warren approach is better. And it’s just funny the way in which foreign policy gets this mind trick that people go through coral areas, the way in which debates there are these long discussions about how are you going to pay for your plans to give Medicare for all or bricolage.


S7: I going to pay. I got to pay. I get a pay. And then in foreign policy, it’s it’s like how many troops? And never the discussion about how you’re going to pay for it.


S5: The number that I am so glad you are bringing this up. This is such a good point.


S7: One of the great speeches in American life was Eisenhowers speech about the military industrial complex. That was all about basically saying every gun we buy is food out of the mouths of a poor person. And he and that was his great legacy as he left office was saying, you must think of these things in the same in the same breath. And however you want to come down on it. You got to at least have a conversation.


S11: And yet we had we do this weird thing when it comes to foreign policy. And so those are two examples of them. I would like us to improve as we seek to build a better nation for ourselves and our children.


S1: Oh, my God. Let’s end on that.


S17: Of course, by the end of that, Jeff Bezos m.p.’s phone hacking story is just its gasp inducing, its jaw dropping. It is tongue twisting. It’s crazy. Every single bit of it is crazy. It’s just it’s impossible to even think about it. I can’t even. It’s just it’s crazy. Simon Claire, it’s true, though. That’s also a whole other layer. But the story as alleged is that. It seems perhaps Jeff Bezos had a private or had dinner with Mohammed Bin, then summoned the de facto leader of Saudi Arabia, crown prince of Saudi Arabia, and they exchanged WhatsApp messages. BEN SOLMAN m.b.a.s later sent him. Soon after I sent him a video. Embedded in that video may have been malware, and that malware was used to then hack Bezos’s phone and get information out Baz’s his phone, which was then later channeled to the National Enquirer as a way to embarrass Bezos by revealing an affair that he was having. All of this because Bezos owns The Washington Post. The Washington Post employed Jamal Khashoggi, who was a columnist who was very critical of m.b.a.s, his regime, who m.b.a.s then had murdered in the embassy. And, you know, there’s so many. There’s lots more there’s lots more going on this afternoon.


S18: My favorite detail, the creepiest part, which I have to say, which is that MBBS before months before the Enquirer broke the story about Bezos is a fair MBBS, texted Bezos a picture of a woman who looks a lot like Lauren Sanchez, the woman Bezos is having this affair with. Oh, my God, that is so weird.


S9: It’s just it’s insane. And so, OK, I want to make a few points just to start out. One is, look, I know Amazon is a very problematic company. A lot of stuff it’s doing wrong. God love Jeff Bezos for what he’s done at The Washington Post and for his courage and I. The thing that makes me sad is, is this going to really not make any other rich billionaire type?


S18: They want to own a newspaper. And I think really hard about owning this paper, that unintended consequences.


S9: I mean, why would you want to own a newspaper? This is the kind of hot water you’re going to end up in with your phone being hacked by some kind of dictator and you’re your private affairs being exposed. You’re not going to want to do it. And so I just really give Bezos so much love and credit for doing being so supportive of the Post and so brave about it to the to great personal cost and financial cost, because Amazon has clearly lost business as well. And Bezos also getting whacked by Trump on this. So. So God love him for it.


S18: Oh, wait a second. Though, to you have to note in some way that like maybe it’s not such a good idea to hang out with. m.p.’s said give him your cell phone number and open the video that he sent you.


S19: Although DTM like actually I think one of the.


S10: Complicating things here is that the times made it seem like it wasn’t clear whether he had actually opened the video or not. Oh, it just appears your sense of how freaked out we all should be about cyber sleuthing.


S20: OK. I suppose that yes, that makes it. But I mean, c’mon, like this is a little like MBBS is not a good person to hang out with. Like that doesn’t. Sure. It should have been so hard to figure out. Well, maybe not the most trustworthy person.


S18: Maybe don’t give him your personal cell phone number. Why are you having dinner with him in the first place?


S9: I wonder if this makes it this. So. So in a way, when you’re a rich person, you’re you live in a world of your peers. Right. And and killing having a washing post columnist dismembered at your order in an embassy is like a not a good thing to do. But your peers basically are being like, that’s cool. It’s OK. We’ve still got billions of dollars. We should still do some business together. But if if people who are in ostensibly a kind of friendly, casual personal relationship with m.b.a.s discover that he’s hacking them and stealing data from their phone and can’t be trusted.


S13: I think that’s a much worse situation for him to find himself in than to actually go around murdering dissidents and and shutting down all dissent in Saudi Arabia. And and and it’s actually gonna be much more costly for him. This story’s gonna be much more costly for him than murdering Kosugi was, because it’s going to make his peers not want to deal with him. Whereas before his peers were like, yeah, you know, the murdering, not great, but still. So that’s my hope.


S21: That’s a terrifyingly cold blooded flight to be making. I mean, let’s just think about that for a second. I see your point and it’s deeply disturbing.


S9: I guess I was thinking about this in the. So I’m in college and this is so far back in the deep the deep recesses of my brain. And it’s also so far back in history that probably none of it’s does any more. But I remember reading sociologists like C. Wright Mills, who studied power elites and so much of what regulates people’s behavior is not actually rules. It’s not actually laws. It is pure expectation and peer, you know, it’s peer norms. That’s the greater constraint. So if you look in the 50s, why is it that CEOs in the 50s were paid so much less than CEOs are paid today because the norms were that you didn’t get paid that much. And once the norms get lifted, people are like, oh, good, I can do whatever I want.


S13: And that if you a really bad person, you were often shunned and shamed. And when you have a society where shamelessness is rewarded, it becomes really, really hard to regulate people’s behavior that the kind of that the tribal the the the sort of peer regulating effects get diminished if shamelessness is rewarded. And I think one of the things, the worst things about Trump and Putin and m.b.a.s and some of the other things is that it’s that it’s allowed it’s allowed that behavior which used to be derided.


S9: And you couldn’t it was like force people to be hypocrites like it, if you like. People had to, at least in public, pretend to believe in certain things. Now, they don’t even have to anymore. They they just there’s no such thing as polite society that the pure regulating function has failed. And it’s failing at the level it’s failing at level of billionaire buddies and it failing at the level of nation states to where the dictators think they can get away with it. Because people like Trump and the United States, which used to try to shame bad behavior, has stopped trying to do it.


S13: And we want to live in a world where where people feel a sense of shame and where you have where there is polite society, like polite society is good place. This idea isn’t just papering over viciousness. Polite society tamps down viciousness. Right.


S8: And that even that’s I thought there was an interesting moment in shifts opening argument where he talked about the frame that his argument is, if you, by the way, in which Donald Trump does business, it separates the world basically into autocrats and hypocrites. And that basically any country that’s not an autocrat is just pretending it’s not. But in fact, has autocratic behavior. And that’s what you’re talking about, David, is that there are even if as a country you have had instances in which you’ve played footsie with autocracy, you nevertheless maintain these norms as a country, as president, as and you maintain them in your regular life that are not 100 percent perfection. They have slips, but that basically you may try to maintain them anyway, because once you drop them, everybody drops everything across the board. And that’s the that’s the unintended thing. It’s hard, super hard to measure with a president who is not it’s not a question. Donald Trump, he he builds his presidency on burning norms. And that’s why I thought it was also funny that John Roberts made his interjection into the impeachment, saying, you know, telling both sides to to reach for a higher level of play because they were speaking in the highest in front of the world’s greatest deliberative body, which is funny since some of the members of the world’s greatest liberal body had said that they were going to refuse to deliberate and were, in fact, going to acquit the president. So but I think that’s all of the all a part of the same piece.


S9: Do you guys assume that one day we’re going to discover all the hacks that have been done of Trump’s phone and all all that stuff that’s going to get released somehow or or that it’s in fact, it’s being used against us as a nation or against him already? Because if Bezos is being hacked, then then Trump, who I suspect is a lot more careless than Bezos is, is probably also being hacked.


S21: Don Junior. Right. And Jared Kushner, like folks are really envious.


S10: My favorite thing said on Twitter this week was the Saudi embassy put out a tweet that said recent media reports that suggest the kingdom is behind a hacking of Mr. Jeff Beezus, his phone phoner. Absurd. We call for an investigation on these claims so that we can have all the facts out. And Jake Tapper embedded that in a tweet. He said, great idea. There was a respected Washington Post columnists who I would love to have investigate the matter. But you killed him.


S13: You know, there’s an MBA like character on the HBO show Succession. And now m.b.a.s has outdone, far outdone, whatever succession had him doing. I yeah, this is a completely minor point, but I actually one of my fears about this, this scandal is that it’s going to kill the show’s succession in the way that. That the Trump presidency killed both Veep and House of Cards because Veep and House of Cards suddenly didn’t seem. They didn’t seem ridiculous anymore. They didn’t they weren’t outlandish enough.


S9: They seemed preset to this impression. And then and then ultimately boring because you’re like, oh, actually, reality’s much, much weirder and more terrible than even these shows are showing. And I feel like the world the world is, too. The world is too too terribly interesting. And fiction has been destroyed by it.


S18: I’m glad that it’s your television show that you’re the most protective of in this scenario of like who knows what US MBBS has in secrets from all these different important rebought. Let’s worry about succession.


S13: Isn’t it also terrible, Emily, as a as as a Jew, I feel this that that seems to be Israeli companies that are behind the the malevolent hacking software.


S21: It is indeed terrible. I think there’s also an Italian company. I notice that because I cringe every time I see those Israeli companies referenced.


S14: But yeah, the Italian company had the really funny name.


S8: It was called like the Italian hacking compositionally known as the Italian hacking team.


S18: Here we are.


S17: Anyway, let’s move Calcutt or when you are having a non-alcoholic cocktail with m.b.a.s and he is he is getting your phone number and preparing to send you very funny gifts that you guys are gonna share and means you’re going to share with each other. Isn’t that exciting? What are you going to be chattering about with him? Emily?


S15: I was mesmerized this week by a kind of sleeper Supreme Court case involving the circumstances in which states can or even perhaps must provide funding to religious schools. It’s a case called Espinosa vs. Montana Department of Revenue. And the facts in the case are that Montana had a tax rebate program where you could donate money for a scholarship to a private school. They included religious schools in the tax rebate. And these are like, you know, evangelical schools like places that, you know, don’t teach evolution or whatever.


S22: And then somebody sued and said, wait a second, this is against Montana’s own constitution, because the Montana constitution, hasn’t it? And no aid to religious schools provision. These are called Blaine amendments. And so then the Montana Supreme Court struck down the funding not just of the religious schools, but actually struck down the whole program. They were like, nope, can’t do this. And so this lawsuit in front of the Supreme Court is brought by the mother of children who could have been eligible for a scholarship but did not receive. Why not someone who actually had a scholarship taken away?


S1: And this is like deeply profound questions about whether religious organizations, including schools, are being discriminated against when they don’t receive federal funding or state funding. I should say, or whether this is like a necessary and wise application of the establishment clause where you don’t want the state funding religion. In fact, indeed, the state is not supposed to be playing this role. The court has these kind of dueling precedents right now. Last year, they said that a religious school had to be eligible for a funding program in a state that was paying for renovating playground equipment. And so the idea was and Thero and Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the opinion, he was pretty clear in a footnote like, OK, we’re talking. I thought it was clear that we’re talking about funding for religious schools that goes to non-religious purposes. On the other hand, there’s an earlier decision from Chief Justice Rehnquist that was seven to two in which there was a state funding program for scholarships for, I think, graduate school. Someone applied to wanted to go to seminary to be a minister and said he was being discriminated against. And the Supreme Court said, no, you’re not being discriminated against because this isn’t about who you are. It’s about what you want to do. And the state doesn’t have to fund actual like preparing someone to play a religious role. Actual funding of religious teaching. So now the court presumably is going to move toward the playground case. Cavanaugh, who’s, you know, one of the new justices, made it clear, I thought that argument this week that that was the direction he was heading in. It’s sort of a baffling case because I can’t figure out the remedy is the state got rid of the entire program. So the court’s going to say, like what exactly? Like if you have a tax rebate for private schools, then you have to include religious schools. Are they going to force the state to revive this program? And then the last part of this that really interests me is that Blaine amendments have a bad history. They kind of came out of anti-Catholic, bigoted sentiment in the late 19th century. And this is something that Cavanaugh pointed to an hour early, an hour oral argument. It’s come up in a case that I’m following really closely about whether states should be allowed to maintain split jury verdicts. Those state constitutional amendments have their own terrible, bigoted history. They’re rooted in white supremacy in Louisiana. anti-Semitism and anti-immigrant sentiment in Oregon. And so I have Cavenagh said something in the jury case about the racist origins of Louis. Louisiana’s jury law. And now he’s talking about bigotry in Oregon. And I can’t help thinking that, like, yes, there is a connection. And also he was setting up a connection there. So anyway, there all these interesting issues swirling around and, you know, at base, this big question about whether states not only can fund religious schools for non-religious purposes, but would have to fund religious schools for religious teachings. That’s a step we haven’t seen yet. And it would be really a big change.


S13: Jesus, as we say, John, what’s your Catorce?


S8: So the the the Blaine an amendment, by the way, is named after James G. Blaine, who ran against Cleveland in 1884. There’s a fascinating story about the Catholic vote in New York and what happened in that race. In addition to an amazing story about the letters that were written by Blaine, known as the Mulligan letters, so that Catholic part of the reason he proposed that amendment is really is really interesting because it essentially ends up costing him the presidency in 1884. Some people think so.


S1: Man, I said Blaine amendments do. Did you automatically think, oh, yeah, those anti-Catholic laws?


S7: Well, I thought hi’s that’s that same Blaine is James G. Blaine, the continental liar from the state of Maine. And so I looked it up.


S8: And then when you mentioned Catholics, it reminded me of the at the very end of his campaign, I don’t wanna give it away, but there is a Catholic event that takes place that ends up hurting him in New York, which was essentially the swing state of the time. Ends up, you know, some people thinking it kills him in in New York and therefore he loses the election to Cleveland. James G. Blaine is a fascinating cat. And I recommend anybody who wants to go into an obscure corner of American history to to go spend some time with Blaine, the butchered. But is the guy who uttered Rahm Roman ism and rebellion. And it wasn’t even Blaine was just on the stage and Bircher was a Presbyterian minister, talked about ROM Roman ism and rebellion. And obviously Roman ism is the idea that the pope controls everything. And this in Catholic New York was seen as a slur against the Catholics. And Blaine couldn’t recoup because he didn’t stand up and and denounce this. He couldn’t recoup among Catholic voters. And that, people say, hurt him in New York. John Berman, Charter, sorry, I went on about James to blame, but I have a chapter that’s in that’s both frivilous and then serious. And I’ll start with the serious ones. The president was asked about the fact that they found additional injuries as a result of the attack on Sulaimani a few weeks ago. And he said, well, I had some headaches and you know, it wasn’t a big deal. And it just strikes me as there are big ways in little ways in which the president is changing things. And I recall that one of the biggest problems that the military deals with is concussions and traumatic brain injury. And then, in fact, it’s it’s one of the legacies of recent warfare. There’ve been hundreds of thousands of these cases. And it is a serious issue for the military. And one of the problems is that people who have traumatic brain injury feel a kind of embarrassment, because it’s not a you know, it’s not something you can necessarily see. And the military has been working to try to fix that. And so you could imagine a different president being asked about the fact that they subsequently found out there were brain injuries as a result of the attack on the U.S. base in Iraq that was in retaliation for the Sumana attack and say, you know, we didn’t know at first. They’re not physical wounds of the kind you might know about, but they are nevertheless a super important and crucial kind of injury that that we’re more worried about in ever than ever. And this is, you know, you just taking it into a direction that actually shined light on it instead of what the president did, which is basically say these aren’t these injuries weren’t very serious, kind of exacerbating the underlying problem about traumatic brain injury to other things. One is the Terry Jones of Monty Python died this week. And much of my childhood and happiness in life is related to his work.


S10: So may he rest in peace. And also, there is one of the maybe the most amazing act of sports I’ve ever seen, which is a. You’ll see it online if you haven’t already.


S7: Will put it on our Web page, which is a fellow whose name I don’t even know playing bocce. And he wrote all that. How did you see it? Yeah. I mean, and so it got me thinking, what is the greatest and what?


S8: And then you have to figure out your terms. What you mean the greatest shot in sports. Because he anyway, that would be, it seems to me, in the top five. It’s quite extraordinary. So I suggest people go look for it.


S9: It’s funny. All right. My chatter. Just a couple of quickies. One is if you have a child and you are looking for something to do with a child and you live in a city. I got a recommendation for you. My son is interested in buses and we rode one of d.c.’s longest bus routes from start to finish this week.


S13: What a great way to spend a couple of hours. I cannot recommend that highly enough as a way of just relaxing. Haven’t spending some time with a child and seeing the city you live in from a new perspective and seen parts that you haven’t seen before. It’s great. Buses are as a form of public transportation. I find buses tricky because they’re they they don’t serve the need that I have most of the time. But as a form of transportation, if on your bike I would rather get on my bike and or and metro is just generally it’s the subterranean, it’s generally quicker, you’re less beholden to traffic, but as a way of just kind of exploring a city. So good. So we rode the 96 bus route in D.C.. Great bus route to ride, but I’m sure there are lots of other ones in your city or in D.C. that you could ride. And then I want to quickly follow up on my iPhone speculation. A lot of you enjoyed us talking about separate digits, whether it was the sour toe cocktail or the the fingerprint function of the iPhone at the Pensacola shooter and why they couldn’t Exuma him. The Pensacola shooter and used fingerprints to unlock the phone. And several many people pointed out that an iPhone, you can’t you just can’t use a fingerprint. And a lot of circumstances, including if the phone has been rebooted. If it’s been off, it’s been there’ve been five unsuccessful unlock attempts or it’s more than 48 hours since you tried to open it. So that would those would all be reasons why the fingerprint functionality might not work. Thanks for the all the fingerprint advice all. And of course, we’ve gotten a great listener chatter. You haven’t sent them to us by tweeting them to us at at Slate Gabfest. And this week’s listener chatter comes from George Garner at out at Mouse Iron Guy, George Garner’s re-tweeting C. r_s H.S. And I’m sorry to say I didn’t look up at S.R. H.S. as before I came here, but it’s a it’s a story from its looks to be a South Florida public radio station or public TV station about the African-American cemeteries in the South that are being built over because they are lost to history, that people forgotten that there are cemeteries there and there’s example after example after example of cemeteries that were for African-Americans. Some from slave times, more post slavery that are just being built over. And now there’s an effort to try to preserve them. And it’s not just in the south actually itself all over the country. And so it’s a nice story about the effort to preserve them.


S3: That is our show for today. The gabfest is produced by Josslyn. Frank Kaplan helped me here in D.C. Our researcher is Bridget Dunlap. Alan, paying, I think is back and is helping John. They think that I heard Allen’s voice earlier, isn’t he? Ryan McAvoy is undoubtedly helping Emily find New Haven studio. He is Gay Brothas editorial director of Slate podcast. June Thomas is managing producer. You should follow us on Twitter at Slate Gabfest tweets and chatter at us. I think we could be announcing some live shows. We don’t have any. I have nothing to announce. But I feel like I want to announce that we might announce that because that’ll just get everybody psyched for Emily Bazelon and John DICKERSON.


S23: David Plotz, think throw a thing touch next week.


S13: Hello. Slate plus. How are you? Slate plus it’s Thursday and perhaps in your religion. Thursday is a holy day, perhaps Thursday is a day of rest. Maybe it’s the Sabbath. Maybe Thursday is a day when you have to work extra hard and your religion, if you were designing religion, maybe Thursday would have sacred value. I think Thursday would be a good day to have sacred value. I love Thursday’s great day. In any case, Emily, you tie this up because this came from one of your bright children as opposed to might possibly have their children.


S6: I haven’t met yet.


S20: My son Simon goes to a youth group on Sundays and they always have great discussion questions. And this is their discussion question from last week.


S16: Is it a social life answer to this? No, actually, I don’t think it’s socialist. It’s youth group is a weird phrase.


S5: I’ve never like I know I don’t really know what else to call it, though. It’s kind of great. It’s like pulls in kids from all over the city.


S20: It’s met at various churches in our neighborhood. I’m I’m into it or I’ve never gone, but I like the idea of it that Simon conveys. Anyway, here’s what I want from my religion that I’m creating preserving the planet.


S16: Wait, wait. Like you raised the question, framed quite your name in. Say what?


S15: Oh, I didn’t question, sir. OK. Let’s back up. Three, two, one. So the question is, if you were creating a religion, what elements would it have in it? What do you what would you prioritize? Is there a god? What’s the point? What are you making your religion or your cult around, David? Do you want to tell us the answer? Oh, I have our answer.


S9: Well, it sort of depends why you’re doing it. Are you doing it for. Are you doing this because you’re trying to make money or is this silly? Is this a move where you think you’re going to get gold?


S6: People aren’t religions or it’s not where they’re supposed to start. L. Ron Hubbard, Lee Imaginal, Rock, Zolbert and Hubbard did it in a kind of cynical way, as I understand from the early. I don’t want this to be other people do it behind other people and do it because they have genuine religious revelation.


S9: So there’s like something that deeply they don’t start a religion out of calculation.


S13: They started because they’ve had some moment of transcendence or some experience that that makes them believe that they’ve been chosen by God or they’ve had a revelation with a higher power. And so it’s not it’s not calculated. So it’s like the idea that it’s calculated as weird. But if I were calculating, if it were me and calculating, I think it would be it would just it would have to involve some kind of natural cathedrals like I would it would just be something you would be experienced in all inspiring natural landscapes would be the core worship experience. But beyond that, I don’t know. So that’s that’s all. That’s as far as I go.


S15: Well, mine relates to your sort of I guess I’m imagining a world in which you could like decide to have a revelation or just decide what you think religion could be very useful for on our planet that we need. And I think what we need is like a galvanizing moral and religious purpose in preserving the planet in environmental custodianship and making sure that our mother earth remains with us. And because it’s such a hard problem to tackle, it’s so long term, we feel defeated in many ways about it. Having religious fervor and purpose and determination behind this cause, I think would be incredibly helpful. So that would be what I would make my religion around.


S8: So here’s the question related to that. How do you affect that?


S24: Because so do you say basically you will be doomed to perdition forever if you don’t save the planet? Do you make people feel obligated for the other people on the planet as a as a part of their faith tradition and therefore they want to save those other people from burning into a crisp? Do you make people’s afterlife connected to the future of the planet long after they’re gone? How do you what’s the psychological motivation that makes your religion achieve the end you want?


S1: That’s a great question.


S10: Well, I’m going to reject Doomed to Perdition, though I do realize that has been a useful for although not useful enough, we should say.


S1: Oh, yeah, I mean, I would like to answer no to that. You’re exalting the idea of taking care of other people and other creatures on the planet than that you could get that that would persuade enough people to join my religion. I think maybe you’d have to sprinkle in some of number three, which provides this promise of not just in the the present but also the afterlife.


S20: Although I mean, because I don’t really believe in heaven and hell at all and feel like Judaism doesn’t really force me to go in that direction, I would like to think maybe you don’t need it. But I do notice that people who promise after lives in heaven. The religions that promise those things tend to be much more popular. So, yeah, maybe we could.


S8: And some of that, although the connection between the behaviors of the pole, between the promise and the behavior required to achieve, it seems to have attenuated in some people’s behavior. In other words, a lot of people who follow religions that have a pretty clear understanding of how you’re supposed to behave don’t necessarily behave that way. So I don’t know how effective that ultimately is when people’s instantaneous self-interest, which is one of the challenge with protecting the planet. Ah, it’s ah so much more putting in the forefront of their behavior than their long term or the interests.


S5: But it’s a short versus the long term that makes me think would be so helpful to have religion on the side of total happiness.


S8: I’m just trying to find a way to make it most effective. I think you’re exactly right.


S13: I think you’re in one of my favorite movements that never really took off that well with Creation Care, which was the evangelical environmental movement. It’s kind of like we got to save Earth because it’s art, it’s God’s creation. And I had a couple of friends who were real enthusiasts for it, but it did feel like, oh, yeah, that’s a that’s a that’s a good messaging technique, but hasn’t seemed to really undo too much of the bad stuff that’s happening. Why does it have to be religion? Why does it have a religion that does this, Emily? Why can’t there be?


S18: Because that’s the topic of our conversation. OK. All right. You think religion? No.


S1: But I also have a more serious answer, which is I think religion is specially galvanizing for a lot of people. It gives you an extra sense of purpose and reason to care and community in the best of circumstances. And those are all helpful aspects of religion that would be good to harness to this cause.


S19: I also think before we get to your suggested religion tax, David, I also think he gets away. You were talking about earlier, which is that you maintain. Norms, imperfect though they may be and give them some weight to do.


S11: To order your behavior when when there’s a when you get to throw a little metaphysical dust on them and make up, you know, make doing the right thing mean more than just what it means here on Earth. So you want it so religion can can add that super moral superstructure that that keeps people from doing the most base and ambitious and powerful things that their hearts truly desire.


S13: I’m going to make I want to make one final point. Which is that one of the things I think that where we’ve gone awry in this country is that our forms of tribalism we’ve attached to the wrong forms of tribalism that people have have rather than than finding tribal identity and things that are productive and valuable. They found it in the wrong places. They found it around. Rather than finding around their class identity, for example, they found it around their political identity or their racial identity. And that’s been pernicious. And I worry. The thing I worry about religion is that that may be making that people’s primary tribal identity, which is kind of what you’re saying that you’re proposing. Emily, is doesn’t have fantastic precedent in the world that people who are motivated first by religion as opposed to by community or as opposed to by family. That’s not the best precedent for having a peaceful and productive world.


S5: Can I just say, rather than partisan, bad religions have done an enormous amount of good in the world, too. It’s a mix. Don’t change. Yeah, I know there are plenty of things to hold against them, but they also really do bring people together also.


S8: People actually at least this may be a. There may be a fault in this polling, but the Times did polling and lot of there’s been a lot of polling that actually people do. If you take all of America, not just the people in our world, that not that many people actually define themselves and their rate and identity by politics, it’s actually really small. A third, if you’re generous in your measurement and even less if you’re stringent in, say, one of the six things that define your identity, the number of people who include politics in that top six is is quite small. So that which should probably give us hope in this is a separate question. But just you mentioned that in passing and I I was struck that the number was as low as it was.


S13: All right. By Slate Plus go good luck with the religion report back. Let us know if you know if you have any open spots for acolytes, priests. You know, people needed to light the candles or anything like that. Talk to you soon.

S1: This ad free podcast is part of your Slate Plus membership.


S2: Hello and welcome to the Slate Political Gabfest for November 14th 2019. The DP arts M B addition I m said DP David Plotz of Atlas Obscura joining me from New Haven is Emily Bazelon of Yale University not Boston but that’s my office in New Haven.


S3: But she’s in New England New England it’s just like a one small region up there. Hello. Emily Barth one of Yale and here that’s Wyoming hello. And chuckling in his usual words suddenly way is John Dickerson of CBS 60 Minutes from New York. Hello John. Hello to John. Did you sleep out last night for Covenant House. That’s tonight. You’re sleeping out tonight. Yeah. Is there a way that people could care less and still support it.


S4: Oh you’re so sweet. Yeah. I mean I guess if they just go to my Twitter page it’s the pinned tweet and that’ll take you to the donor’s choose a Web site where they can donate.


S5: People have been extremely generous and it’s been really lovely to see on today’s gabfest will the first public impeachment hearing change the debate about impeachment then. Be still my beating heart Michael Bloomberg Michael if I liked column is preparing to run for president as is Deval Patrick who I don’t call anything at all.


S6: Then the Supreme Court seems ready to endorse to support to validate the president’s plan to end DACA. The dreamers program. Is that going to happen. Is that a legit decision from the court. If it does come plus we’ll have cocktail chatter on Wednesday. We saw the first public hearings in the impeachment investigation by the House of Representatives of President Trump the House Intelligence Committee chaired by Adam Schiff held their first hearings. They invited Bill Taylor and George Kent to testify publicly. What were the highlights.


S7: Well there were two new pieces of information important I would say.


S8: Pieces of information from Bill Taylor. One was that an aide of his who I think now the Democrats are trying to scheduled to testify that this aide overheard a phone call between Gordon Seidlin the ambassador to the EU and President Trump. This is the day after Trump’s call was Lenski and on the overheard phone call Trump is asking Sandlin about this hope he has that the Ukrainians are going to investigate Joe Biden on his son. And so it seems like confirmation that this is really what’s on Trump’s mind as he’s withholding the military aid. The second piece of information is that the Ukrainians were aware that this military aid was being held up as they were trying to figure out what to do and how to handle the pressure they were getting from Trump and Giuliani. I think we already knew that that timeline was falling into place. The Ukrainians had this knowledge of the withheld military aid earlier and maybe John will remember which other witness told us that. But I felt like that defense that Trump and his allies have put out there has already been falling apart. And so just to play it out the defense was well this couldn’t have been a real pressure campaign because the Ukrainians didn’t even know that they weren’t receiving this aid. It seems like that is just not the case.


S9: Yeah well so first of all we should step back and remind ourselves where we were last week because even this line of argument I think Emily and correct me if I’m wrong slots into a weird defense in slots into the defense that it didn’t happen. And if Ukraine didn’t know about it it wasn’t illegal or it wasn’t wrong at various stages Ukraine doesn’t need to know that the president is doing what’s alleged. If the president is doing what’s alleged and it just hasn’t gotten to that point in the in the activity. So that’s just one. One quick thing about this. Another important thing is that there is Jim Jordan the congressman from Ohio is said who made the case that Emily outline just now has said you know that the investigation was never launched what wasn’t launched was the announcement of the investigation. There has been testimony or there will be testimony and there’s been reporting that in fact the announcement was about to be made that an interview between the Ukraine president and Fareed Zakaria on CNN was actually scheduled and he was going to announce this and then because the aid started to flow that interview was canceled. But on the phone call with the president that summarized in what the president calls the transcript the Ukraine president promises to do the investigation. So in fact he did make a promise to the president that he would do the investigation. So when Congressman Jordan says that the event there was no one investigation well he had promised the president that it would exist. But what all the wrangling was about and what the Democrats point to is the wrangling was about making a public announcement about this which they argue was actually more important to the president because he wasn’t genuinely interested in a corruption investigation. He was interested in a public statement that would hurt Joe Biden in the context of the presidential campaign.


S10: And just to go back to the obvious point which is that attempted extortion and extortion which fails for whatever reason it’s still an attempted extortion because just because the full force of it is not carried through it is still an attempted extortion. And and in fact four Ukrainian soldiers who died during the period when the aide was held up you could argue with a life or death decision it may have been that that aid and equipment and training that might have saved lives among Ukraine army were lost because this was held up for time. It’s not enough to say there’s not the quid pro quo didn’t wasn’t carried forward.


S7: I mean I think it also matters that the reason this extortion plot fell apart was not that Trump had a change of heart and suddenly thought Oh my God what am I doing. I can’t abuse my power in this way. The reason it fell apart was that they started getting caught. And Congress got really mad that this aid that they had authorized was being withheld and it started to rattle the diplomatic corps so much that there was a whistleblower complaint. I mean to me and just sort of assessing the situation that makes a big difference.


S4: Yes to just three things quick things that also got fuzzy it up in the first day of testimony but that matter one is that the aide as Emily just said was authorized by Congress and signed by the president. So if the president was as interested in corruption as his defenders say there had already been an investigation into Ukrainian corruption which is a prerequisite for releasing that money. But also the president was in this case he had President has free reign and extraordinary reign not total free reign and national security issues. But in this one he was constrained by a law that he had already sent and also there were some of the president’s defenders have said well this is just the tailor and Cantu testified on Wednesday are just unhappy about the direction in U.S. foreign policy under Trump certainly that’s the case you could tell. But this isn’t just about a dispute over policy. This is about whether a president who is given his power by the people use the power in the service of the national interest or used it in his own private interests and that it seems to me was another thing that got kind of fuzzy add up.


S3: It is so maddening to hear this absolute bullshit about the concern about corruption and the president’s legitimate concern that the pretense it would be so much better if everyone were just honest about it all like I’m not saying it would have. It would mitigate the crime that was committed or the wrong that was committed against the country. But this level of hypocrisy and lying about the pretense that there is an actual attempt to constrain corruption and that’s what this administration is cares about is so it’s such an insult to all of us. We all know this has been done for purely political purposes. That is the only reason it is happening. It’s only reason anyone cares about it. And like let just come out and say it. And just like that let’s agree that that’s what is being done and you do you decide whether that’s an impeachable offense or not but to put this this kind of complete Potemkin excuse up there is maddening.


S7: I think the falsity though is crucial because if you’re going to argue that OK this happened but it wasn’t worth impeaching you have to hold on to that facade. Right. And that is where they’re going to end up because they the facts are going to drive them they’re well you know but they’ve.


S3: But they’ve ended up at the big Mulvaney has already done it. I mean they’ve already conceded the political piece of it. Mulvaney has already said we did it for political reasons well and then they took it back right.


S7: I mean they keep sort of circling around this but if they give up on the idea of like oh this was really about corruption it becomes harder to argue that this was acceptable conduct and we just shouldn’t worry about it very much.


S4: Well. But there are people. This is what’s still so so messy is that there are some Republicans who say no he cared about corruption this had nothing to do with the Bidens and there are others who say he shouldn’t have tried to target Biden. But it’s not impeachable. They still haven’t gotten the story straight. And the president fact on Sunday tweeted to Republicans don’t don’t say there was anything wrong it was a perfect phone call. There was nothing there was nothing wrong here. I think the problem with the corruption thing is that there’s not a large body of evidence showing the president with deep seated passion for corruption a B if you ask Axelrod on the contrary there’s a ton of evidence that the president has a deep seated passion for corruption especially cares more about corruption than it does about anything else anyway.


S11: But I think the actually that was Congressman Hines his point was not that the president was trying to end corruption but was trying to aim corruption.


S4: I thought that was a clever clever soundbite but these two witnesses could have been used by Republicans to make the corruption case in other words they know quite a lot about corruption in Ukraine. And presumably if the president were as interested as his defenders say the two people involved in Ukraine policy would say oh yes I remember all those meetings we had at the agency an interagency level where where we were told about how much the president cared about corruption and how much he wanted to button back the oligarchs. And I remember. But there was no pre-recorded like that because the president has not shown a broad interest in the Ukraine corruption at least that ever came to them and they would be two people who would who would probably who would probably know about it. So it does seem it seems to be a post hoc rationalization but all Republicans need for their own purposes is a sufficient post hoc rabbit rationalization to get through the process.


S3: So Emily the Republican strategy seems to be several. There are several elements but one key element that came out on Wednesday was this is all hearsay this is all hearsay it’s secondhand. We don’t know you didn’t hear it. You never talked to the president. You’re alleging this conspiracy orchestrated by the press. You’ve never talked to him. And and the people you. You’re citing some aide of yours who overheard a conversation really. Is that all you’ve got. That’s hearsay. What are the problems with that. I mean there’s there’s so many problems with it. I think it’s actually fairly effective talk dilatory Stalin rhetorical play but from a substantive perspective what’s wrong with it.


S12: Well the main thing is that the people who have the firsthand knowledge the White House is blocking from testifying. So Mick Mulvaney Mike Pompeo our secretary of state the question of whether John Bolton is going to testify he is kind of playing footsie right now with the idea of like oh I need a court order in order to show up. No he does not need a court order. There’s no law or precedent from the Supreme Court suggesting that he can’t show up for a congressional subpoena. Now the White House could then try to block certain lines of questions by invoking executive privilege. But that’s a different matter. That’s about specific questions not the idea of showing up at all. So if none of the main players who were talking to President Trump are going to testify then yes you’re going to have this outer circle less inner circle of people who had knowledge of what was happening and who become the main witnesses for it.


S3: Right. And. And then if you were a Democrat who was in that position because it seems the Democrats are not right now going to pursue the the very languorous court process of forcing people under subpoena to testify or trying to get a court to order them to testify what what should the Democrats do about this Republican defense.


S13: I mean I think they should point it out they should say well if you want the people who were in the room with President Trump like hand them over we’re eager to talk to them and we would love to hear what they have to say. Right. And without that testimony the question is whether there’s enough damning facts piling up that you don’t really need the principals involved to confirm all of it right. I mean the Republican defense is this is a big deal to impeach or remove the president. And so we should be hearing from the people in the room OK. Well either you give us the people in the room or you’re not. That defense becomes less potent because you’re the ones who are preventing us from hearing those people’s accounts.


S9: But if you’re being a smart strategist wouldn’t we all agree that the smartest thing to do is to say this is all hearsay. These people weren’t on you know they weren’t in the room and then never provide the people who were in the room.


S14: Yeah I think it’s the best they may have done right.


S3: It’s definitely going to work in the sense that he’s he’s certainly not gonna be removed from office in this process and this is one of several useful covers they have given themselves one of several fig leaves that they’re sowing into a loin cloth of defense. What. So John it was a you know what was described yesterday by Taylor and Kent was breathtaking and I think somebody somebody who had missed the last five years and was brought in to hear this testimony would be like Oh my God the president of the United States did this. This is what’s happening in United States. My God he will be removed in moments. But obviously the rest of us have lived through these past some years of the Trump presidency and of an extremely short half life of Trump scandals and of the extremely low impact of these these TV moments and the non durability of these moments because they’re these counter narratives these two completely different narratives. So was there anything that you see happening or that happened yesterday or that you foresee happening that that could be a breakout moment that does shift how people see things.


S4: A couple of things I mean you know this is a this is a I don’t know what my this is either a jigsaw puzzle or it’s a marathon or. But I mean we were this yesterday’s hearing like in all hearings and all he says is to is to describe one piece of the puzzle and then presumably through the rest of the process all the other pieces will be put together and the and the picture that’s described you know the sea the sea shore scene that the puzzle is supposed to be. They’ve laid out. And then all the pieces get put together and you see if it looks like a sea shore or it looks like you know a mountain scape and but but that’s a long process. And what I think the Trump campaign in 2015 all the way through his campaign and now the Trump presidency has done I think effectively is condition people in the press and in general the citizenry to evaluations and momentary applause meters and approval ratings. So when Eric Trump talks about his father’s presidency or his father’s campaign and what was so amazing the first thing he talks about is the ratings.


S9: Yesterday the White House press secretary talked about how it was a boring hearing other defenders of the president talked about how it was so boring. So that we’ve come into this funny place where if something is boring it’s not valid. Oh boy that’s going to get us in we’re going to be an awful shape if that is true. But that’s not just this president. That’s of course been everything that’s happened starting in the television age. So I think one thing that was the most interesting yesterday which connects what I just said with with I think we were saying earlier is this I the phone call that Emily mentioned when we started which is the overheard phone call between Sunlen and the president now we have to. This is literally a game of telephone. So we have to to kind of triangulate and make sure this is right. OK. Because here you have Taylor describing what an aide told him that he overheard from Solyndra the president so there’s a lot of ways in which this can not turn out to be what Taylor said it was. But let’s imagine it was.


S4: Well the reason that’s important of course is it because he puts more detail on the central character here which is the president being fixated on Biden which again is this instance in turning American statecraft not towards American interests but in terms to his private interest. And so if you’ve got a couple more pieces of data like that which are show this direct connection between the president and his fixation on his likely opponent then you have you know then the Democrats case is strengthened. So that was one moment yesterday while it was not pyrotechnic or cinematic. It was I think substantively useful for those trying to build the case against the president.


S3: I. Before we get to the three points that really disturbed me. I certainly think this is worthy of impeachment. What what is described the behavior the president has described as worthy of impeachment and it is an important investigation to have and it’s absolutely shocking that that U.S. foreign policy has been suborned unto the president’s personal interests in this way. There are three things that are so disturbing about this process that just worry me for the future of the country. And I just want to put the marker out. And it’s all the fault of the president and his supporters. I would note it’s not the fault of the investigation one is the lack of cooperation from the executive branch and the refusal to treat this as a legitimate investigation. Cooperate with it to provide witnesses to provide evidence to answer questions is puts at risk the very notion that there the separation of powers can survive and that the legislature can exist and in a form that can check the executive. That or that there can be any check on the executive. That’s number one. Number two there is no agreement on a set of facts that there is a partisan media on the right that has decided it will not treat the facts that are being laid out in an honest and straightforward way and instead treating them in this absolutely honky tonk bizarre like let’s just look chaff it up let’s pretend that things are obviously that are untrue or true way and causing there to be no shared set of beliefs around what is happening or shared set of knowledge that’s super disturbing. And finally and maybe the most importantly is the discrediting of public servants of bureaucrats or people who work for government the systematic attacks on Kent and Taylor and others who have been involved in this investigation people who’ve worked selflessly and admirably in the national interests for Republican presidents for Democratic presidents. That’s damn it. These are all things that did the damage we are doing for a generation forever in this country. If we allow this to go forward and so I’m not saying that the impeachment process is causing any impeachment post this is revealing why it’s revealing this and starkest relief.


S4: I would turn your first point a quarter and say I think it’s actually the legislature that should have enough self-respect to stand up for its own role in in life. This is something that passed with bipartisan support. The president signed. You know they as a member of you mean it’s extreme. You go back and read the way Congress used to behave when people had backbones. I mean Spiro Agnew tried to convince an Idaho senator to vote with the president and he said I was gonna vote with the president but now I’m not. And anytime you try and pressure me I will vote the opposite way you want. Now go away. This is an ally of the president’s. This is a fellow Republican but they’ve believed that they had some of their own powers and they represented the country in its most diverse form in the House and the Senate and that that was necessary in a separation of powers. That is that’s gone. So that’s one thing that has nothing to do with left or right. It just has to do with the different branches and then the other point you make I think is really really really important and I think it’s a part of the conversation here either in the impeachment context or the or the or the general election. This is the first time we’ve had an impeachment when there’s a re-election coming. And that’s I think the idea. Emily you’ll correct me if I’m wrong with the idea of vicarious liability the president in taking the position in doing the initial thing but then also in taking the position he has has caused people to rush to his defense and in so doing they have some of them attacked people like Taylor and can’t who whatever you may think of them are public servants who’ve dedicated their lives to America to both parties to the idea of America and who represent and they said this in their opening statement the stuff that animates the American government all around the world and an intimate service in all of those jobs where you don’t get any public praise but you do it for good for your sense of patriotism and your sense of American values.


S9: I really agree with you that this is a there’s a real cost here. And you saw it in the in the opening statements of the two men who talked about why they do what they do and why they believe what they believe gaffe has listeners.


S6: We have our annual conundrum show coming up live at the foxy fox theater in Oakland California on December 18th and we are being joined by special guest Adam Savage the myth the legend of Myth Busters is going to join us as a guest to help us solve them the true the true mysteries the true problems that Americans contemplate that they grapple with every day. So go to slate that complex lie to get tickets for our December 18th show in Oakland and tweet to us with your conundrum at hashtag conundrum at Slate gab fest. Or good or Slate dot com flash conundrum page and you can fill out a form there where you can submit your conundrum.


S5: So how is my week. You ask. My week was pretty darn good because I discovered that my crush my beau ideal of politics Dorothy to my Toto. Michael Bloomberg is planning to enter the Democratic primary for president. What a day. What a week.


S15: What a month by the time you’re done. I’m going to be a puddle on the floor of rage and sorrow and I won’t be able to say anything.


S16: Also Deval Patrick Former Governor Massachusetts close friend. President Obama is also gonna enter the Democratic primary.


S3: So Emily what are these two likely entries. Signal both of these gentlemen passed up a chance a year ago to get into the Democratic primary. It was getting going. Obviously they see something that they see a possibility or they are concerned about something so what is it. What is it.


S11: See something say something.


S12: I think they are concerned about Joe Biden’s candidacy and as they watch Joe Biden fade and flicker as he has done in his presidential campaigns in the past and I think do we have someone in the field who can really unite the moderate and progressive wings of the Democratic Party and then reach out to some of the independents who presumably the Democrats need to win the White House. I think this is also nervousness on the part of some of the big donors in the Democratic Party who don’t always have the wisest judgment. And it’s important to note that 75 percent of Democratic voters feel perfectly satisfied with the choices that they currently have. So this is a kind of top down set of concerns. And you know for Michael Bloomberg it’s really just like Michael Bloomberg deciding to get in and I’m sure there are lots of consultants whispering in his ear because they can make a lot of money if he decides to run.


S17: I would get for the vote whispering Michael Bloomberg there. Oh my God. Just because this is my land but I don’t know why I was playing around.


S12: Patrick one imagines that some of the Obama people are talking to him because he is close with Obama. And they weren’t necessarily super excited about Biden as a candidate to begin with. So that seems like it has maybe more substance to it though I really wonder if someone who’s been working for Bain Capital for lo these many years since he got out of politics is going to be able to do all that uniting that is supposedly what needs to happen. Michael Bloomberg like yes he had his technocratic effective moments in New York. He was so terrible on Stop and Frisk and criminal justice policy. He has never for one second reckoned with any of that and indeed he continues to defend it.


S18: And so for me Michael Bloomberg is just like I just it it pains me a great deal to imagine that this is how he is going to let his money on fire.


S3: John to Bloomberg we’re gonna we’re gonna get to that in a minute. Emily we’ll talk about his lending his money empire in a second and today’s show he’s not just giving Burgoyne that money.


S19: Maybe you have been whispering in his ear and I’m like that would be so great. You did job Bloomberg. What a thought. I support him and he could pay me. That’s the best of all possible worlds. I’m kidding. We’d have to have the show. I’ve never been so angry with you. I’m just a note this is all I get.


S6: But so Michael Bloomberg like many billionaires John has been at the butt end of attacks by Elizabeth Warren who’s making a wealth tax a big deal in her campaign and by Bernie Sanders too. Do you think we only have one billionaire in the Democratic race Tom Steyer. Do you think that Bloomberg’s entry helps this case of Warren’s or I feel like the Bloomberg candidacy is really a gift to Elizabeth Warren even though I’m sure Bloomberg contends it is the exact opposite.


S11: Well implicit in it is that she’s doing well enough that that he’s worried. And also implicit is the Joe Biden is not doing well enough. And so he’s worried. And that’s also true of the Deval Patrick campaign. So that’s two things that help warn and hurt Biden. So and to the extent that it helps Warren directly and then sort of secondarily it helps her directly by you know thinking she’s doing well enough and helps her secondarily by by damaging one of her rivals. So I think that’s all good I think the problem is that the polls show and you know my gosh bring in you know enormous grain of salt about the polls. But but they have shown a steady kind of slow increase for Warren that does seem to have plateaued a little bit. So so the question then is has she hit a kind of ceiling and what does that mean. You know you can hit a ceiling and then move on. That is something her candidacy has to worry about. But what this means now for the Democratic race is a lot more messiness going around. And I don’t quite see how it gets resolved. I mean you’re going to have an eye because now you have Deval Patrick basically is probably not going to compete in Iowa I think. And then you have Bloomberg being a bit just a big money participant and that’s just a lot of energy in the system that can bounce all kinds of different ways. So I it’s it’s gonna be fascinating. And the argument the best argument that that Bloomberg could make is one that nobody wants to hear but the best argument is basically Presidents can only focus on two or three things. One of them they have to focus on is national security and covert operations. So that’s one taken off the table. The other two if you believe that climate change is existential OK the president’s gonna have to deal with that that’s two and three if you think economic disparities need to be reordered then maybe that’s the third although it’s quite hard to do outside of some kind of deal with Congress to pass some legislation which makes it more durable and more broadly shared. So in today’s political environment that would be a super heavy lift. But if at least on the first two Bloomberg could say look I can get things done I’ve been able to get things done. And while all the issues that Democratic primary voters care about are basically a very small percentage of what a president directly does. And what I will do is appoint people who care about these issues a lot but that we know from experience presidents don’t get to you don’t get to actually do much on those issues. That’s the best case he can make. Nobody’s going to like to hear that case because the primary is fought over the issues that presidents don’t have either direct control over or don’t have a lot of have. It’s much messier than the things they do have direct control over.


S3: I want to I’m going to use the balance of my time. I want to use some time. I do want to talk about Bloomberg substantively. So I think what Bloomberg does not bring to the table as a presidential candidate is pretty extraordinary and I’m sure it will doom his candidacy when he is old. He’s 77 years old and he’s not a young 77. He’s an old 77. He he doesn’t he’s not I mean he’s a sharp guy but he’s not as sharp as he was at 67 or 57 and there’s nowhere to go in that but down.


S6: So so I think if you’re concerned about an old candidate Bloomberg has that problem worse than maybe anybody in the race but but Biden himself he does not have a great history around me too. There are things that he is alleged to have said to women in his employ and in fact claims that have been made of complaints and lawsuits suggest he doesn’t have a fantastic record on issues that are really of concern to a lot of Democrats these days and should be of concern to all of us. He is a rich guy who really lives like a rich guy horses islands jets. Bloomberg just seems like a rich dude who likes being really rich. Stop and frisk as Emily touched on is devastating. It was a terrible policy that severely impacted black and Latino men in particular in New York City over many years. It was was illegal right.


S12: Emily A judge made them basically if not entirely stop it but severely curtail it because yes it was a form of racial profiling she found.


S3: Yeah yeah. I mean with the loathes grasping illegal and not very effective policy that created a huge amount of resentment. OK all true. I just would note that if you were doing a any universe where you had a chief executive that you wanted to run a country well he would be your clear number one draft pick. And with no one very close in second place there is nobody who he was an extraordinarily successful self-made businessman built a company that defeated other people competing against him in the field made markets more efficient. You know you know and create a huge amount of wealth while doing it. And huge contributions to how news and information is collected and gathered. He was an incredibly effective mayor of New York City. York City got richer more prosperous much better run. Public policy innovator left and right and center all over the place. And you know and made mistakes. Stop and Frisk was a mistake. So but if you look at what New York was at the beginning of his mayorship and what it was at the end there is no doubt that what he did and the people he appointed and what they did was extraordinary it made the city you know the most successful and prosperous city in America. And he is an incredible philanthropist as well. What he has spent his money on post mayoral mayorship and even during his mayorship has been really valuable and what he’s done on guns and what he’s done on climate has been effective and targeted and serious and ruthless. The guy just knows how to get shit done in a way that almost nobody else in public life does. And we I don’t think he can be elected president. I don’t think he’s a particularly good campaigner. I think there are all sorts of ways in which he is. He is anathema to this Democratic field. But I think we would be we would be foolish and shortsighted too to say he shouldn’t participate in this primary or say he doesn’t have the like the he hasn’t earned the right to really make a serious run here because I don’t believe he’s a.


S19: Can I give you a little visual listener Emily.


S10: And we’re just like looking sort of patiently and then just right in an eye roll. That was an extraordinary eye roll that you were unable to see. But I wish there I roles could be heard.


S4: If only I wrote him. John go ahead. No well actually we should just go. If you do are you dying to say something or you just eye rolling.


S7: I mean the president is not the CEO. Like if we were trying to choose our cold blooded manager to implement other people’s ideas and we could be sure that some of his terrible ideas and I would say you know his his he is a real mix of values some of them line up with Democratic priorities like gun violence and climate change and some of them really don’t. And I don’t see anything that reassures me that the problems with his tenure in mayor in New York are things that he recognizes. So I just feel like this is not the right role for someone like him.


S20: I’m sorry what is wrong with being a heterodox thinker in this world.


S21: Here’s the thing heterodox. But if you can as a great deal of harm to a whole community of people and you fail to recognize that indeed you continue to defend it long past the expiration date long past when other people have admitted that this was not worth the cost the human cost that is a problem like that’s not heterodox that’s being really stubborn about something that you thought was a good idea and wanted to try that turned out to be terrible but I agree that that was a bad policy.


S3: And he seems not to have come to any reckoning with it. But they willing to accept a very long. I’m really to cut him a break because he’s a very long record of public service and public accomplishment and private service and private accomplishment. And so certainly I want to hear from him. And I think he should run.


S11: Every candidate has a tradeoff. So the candidate who is a 10 on your values scale may not be very high up on the other scales right. Part of leadership and that is either gonna be a big problem if it’s a presidency of crisis and presidency if tough decision making because somebody who’s got the perfect values but hasn’t seen the time in the batting cage facing lots and lots and lots of hard difficult decisions of the kind of president makes which are unlike any other kind of decision. But if you’ve had a history of making tough decisions you’ve got some experience on this. You know we don’t know what the president’s he’s going to face but you make a compromise with any of the candidates and so the question then is are the compromises you would have to make on Bloomberg that much different with respect to the actual job they’re going to do than the compromises you would make for the other kinds of candidates who may be great on one thing but but have Bloomberg style deficiencies in the other characteristics that a president needs I think.


S14: Yes I. This is all fine. Oh well we’ll enjoy this person’s candidacy is going nowhere.


S3: But I also think it is very different to think of a Michael Bloomberg fallacy than Tom Steyer candidacy. And there’s this there’s this way in which people sort of dismiss Bloomberg. Oh you know great big pile of money running for president. And it’s not that I mean Bloomberg has a great big pile of money I’m sure he will deploy it. He will hire lots of people who will pay them a lot. He will spend a lot of money. He will buy a lot of ads. And there’s a vanity to it of course there’s a vanity but there’s a vanity in the service of somebody who has a record of enormous accomplishment and could can make a legitimate case which I don’t think satire can that hey I’ve done this I’ve done this version of this job in the private sector in the public sector and philanthropy I would do it better and different than other people here. You should at least listen to me.


S9: Can can I ask what you guys think of Deval Patrick and just add this one thing you talked about speaking so far in the candidacy the kind of rhetorical skills of a candidate have not been overwhelming of anybody on the on the stump. I mean they sure they can fire up their voters but that’s not where you know real rhetorical greats have been. They’ve been able to capture an entire country and though we totally overvalue the power of rhetoric in a presidency it’s not a totally unimportant part of the job. Whoever the next president is if it’s not Donald Trump will have this repair work to do on the country and just kind of speak to the country and that’s one of the things people say Deval Patrick has and brings to the race. Do you think anybody cares about that in democratic politics or is it like all primary races really focused on the core things that the party base is care about.


S13: I think people care about that. I mean I think if Patrick can fire up audiences and you know light up the debate stage people will take note and there might be space for a new person to come in. It’s kind of crazy given how many options there are. And you could imagine that Kamala Harris and core the Cory Booker are seething over this because they are both offering candidacies that aren’t like wholly different from Deval Patrick. I mean Pete but a judge could say the same thing in his own youthful weird way I suppose if Patrick can capture people’s imaginations then I think that could make a difference.


S6: Slate Plus members you get bonus segments on the Gabfest. Others like podcasts go to sleep out complex gab fest plus to become a member today. Today our bonus segment will be about the crisis in student journalism. Maybe that crisis it’s not the right word but the controversies in student journalism as embodied by two fights at Harvard and Northwestern over a student newspapers go to Slate dot com slash gabfest plus the Dreamers case was at the Supreme Court this week.


S3: It didn’t actually seem to be a case about dreamers. What was it a case about.


S13: Well it’s a case about whether President Trump can rescind the order that was sparing dreamers from detention and deportation. That was an order that President Obama put place after trying very hard to reach a legislative compromise with Congress. And so you know normally one president can enact an executive order and the next president can withdraw it. That is probably sadly to me and for the Dreamers what is going to happen in this case. But the Trump administration as is so often true did this in a kind of helter skelter fashion. Instead of saying we don’t think it’s a good policy idea to spare dreamers for deportation they put the whole weight of their decision to withdraw this order on the idea that it was illegal to begin with. That theory comes from a challenge not actually to the dreamers but to another order President Obama signed that spared and created a kind of work authorization status for close relatives of dreamers. That other program which is called DAPA not DACA. The problem is that while there was an appellate appeals court ruling that said President Obama had gone too far the Supreme Court split four to four on that case. So we don’t have any definitive decision about this related program much less the one that affects the Dreamers themselves. And it did seem like the Trump administration was basically trying to duck responsibility instead of saying we don’t care about saving the dreamers. They were saying oh there’s nothing we could do here because President Obama broke the law. And so the argument before the Supreme Court you know the liberal justices who are very sympathetic to the dreamers were emphasizing that kind of weirdness in the Trump administration’s approach.


S18: But the problem was a couple of years later the Trump administration when Kirsten Nielson was the secretary of the Department of Homeland Security she came in and signed a further order in which she added a very thin paragraph that did provide some policy justification and so for the five conservative justices who are more you know amenable to the Trump administration’s proclivities here that provides a kind of rationale for letting the Trump administration go ahead and you know basically this is a fight a legal fight over agency power and the 1940s law the administrative procedures act which set certain limits on how agencies can go about making decisions and then changing their decisions. But at bottom this is a political matter. And when the country elected President Trump the country gave him the power to run the Department of Homeland Security. And so even if this order were somehow to be stopped for this kind of technical reason certainly the presidency has the power to make this change. It’s just a matter of how they go about it. And I think really if people don’t like the idea of thousands of dreamers being deported then they need to elect a different president building what.


S10: Emily just said there is this way in which this is a this is an optics fight which is that the Trump administration could easily get rid of this policy but to get rid this policy would have to come out and say we’re getting rid of this policy that helps dreamers and instead they they’re choosing this way where they can deflect blame and deflect responsibility and say oh it’s Obama’s fault it’s the law at fault it’s Congress’s fault it’s not us that’s getting rid of it we we just it’s in supportable. Under current law and so it just can’t be done. Regrets sorry sorry dreamers. We’d love to help you but we can’t. It’s a it’s a way of avoiding responsibility for it. And I think there is there is this. I’m not sympathetic. I think this is a very was a very good policy and it’s a humane policy and it’s obscene that we would get rid of it. And it’s dumb that the Trump administration will now spend resources targeting the most useful kind of people who are here under these circumstances the most innocent kind of people.


S6: So it’s bad government but they are not wrong that the law in Congress the Congress has has Doctor responsibility here that Congress could perfectly well step step forward and make life clearer for dreamers and set up some sort of path where they could stay in the United States under certain circumstances even without a path to citizenship. And they they have not done it. Now it’s you know they haven’t done it because largely because Republicans don’t want to put an immigration win on the books for Democrats but it is true that the Congress has really hit Congress for the past 30 years has essentially not managed to get anything done on immigration. That’s a big problem. You know if you had a president who.


S11: Had a kind of larger view about the reforms needed in government and thought you know the legislature is the place that these two sit these questions should be adjudicated and answered and I’m going to use the power of my office not to tell them what to do to basically to tell them to go do it to get to stop messing around here Republicans have not embraced this also because they don’t they don’t want to have a nightmare in their own party because there’s obviously you know there was comprehensive immigration reform passed in the Senate and it broke down in the house. There were various attempts to try to make it go back to trying to get to President Trump to to do as several different people suggested to him a kind of Nixon goes to China where he made a kind of grand deal or a deal that included the Dreamers plus some other things and he retreated each time when he got blowback from his base. If you if you had a president who’s who came in and said Congress must deal with this because we can’t have this big coat keep going back and forth in executive orders and having basically being a kind of weird back and forth between the executive and the judicial. That would be it would be great to see that because basically this is a problem that should be handled by Congress and isn’t being and doesn’t seem to be able to be handled in the foreseeable future. And it’s just one more way in which we’re stuck and then having a new president I don’t think is going to change the dynamic of the Senate or the house. So I mean unless the new president brings in with them a huge wave of reform and members of Congress are elected along with that.


S18: And it’s kind of crazy right because there’s an 80 percent of the country support deportation relief for DREAMers and 80 percent of the country also is in favor of border security. I mean whatever that means to people it just seems like there is a compromise to be had here and Congress can’t find it because it’s so polarized.


S4: Well and if you had a I mean this president could have done it easily if he’d if he had the pain threshold on this issue that he has on so many others I mean imagine if he wanted to be as disruptive in this issue as he is in so many other ways. He could tell those members of his own party for the purposes of making a big deal and for the purposes of getting you know half a loaf for 80 percent of a loaf he could have deployed a lot of energy towards trying to do something which would have been hugely risky but he’s done lots of risky things so far. And he would have when you think of who has leverage in the in the system as it stands right now. He has the most leverage because of his relationship with this issue and his base. And so it’s a it’s a missed opportunity to use the bully pulpit and to use his strength within his own party.


S3: You know I mean I think one reason why as we’ve learned this week is that his chief adviser on immigration Stephen Miller is fundamentally a white supremacist white nationalist. We’ve got from the reveal of a bunch of e-mails that he sent in 2015 and 2016 is that the person who is the architect of the policy around immigration does not he is not one of the 80 percent who want immigration or who want deportation relief for DREAMers.


S9: Well I think there’s no evidence that the president diverts in these views from Miller on those on those points.


S3: Emily last question on the court will issue its ruling. Let’s assume it’s in favor of the Trump administration sometime early next year correct. And then that will be in the teeth of the campaign in June probably and maybe earlier so into the teeth of the presidential campaign. Do you think there’s any chance that this DHS starts to actually deport DREAMers or will they just find a way to kind of push this forward path to Election Day. That they’re not you know taking doctors and teachers out of their communities and sending them back to countries that never been to I mean that’s a matter of prosecutorial discretion right.


S13: Which kind of goes back to the root of all of this. And if they want to defer the deportations to spare themselves that kind of election period coverage they can put off the deportations. But then what’s the point of rescinding the order.


S5: All right. Let’s go to cocktail chatter Emily Bazelon And you’re having a delicious rum based cocktail when you’re thinking topically in this winter weather. What are you going to be drinking and chattering about.


S13: I want to recommend two new books that I have thoroughly enjoyed. One of them is a collection of poetry called felon by my friend Dwayne Betts. It’s really wonderful it’s gotten a ton of attention. I thought it was just a joy to read. And also you know obviously has its dark moments it’s a book called felon but there’s a tremendous amount of kind of hope along the way in these poems. And I really recommend it. And the second book is actually a book that Dwayne told me to read and he was right. It’s called the world doesn’t require you. It’s a book of short stories by Ryan Amilcar Scott.


S18: And it’s just this interesting foray into a kind of made up black community and the characters there which which I I recommend John vell.


S6: What do you chatter about.


S9: I’m chattering about the most recent Pew Research Center poll that recently came out in early October. But on American attitudes and partisanship and it confirms everything we know. Three years ago they did a study in 2016 and found that there was great more partisan division and animosity than than before and now they’ve three years later find that that animosity has only deepened. But it’s interesting to see the ways in which it’s happened. And it’s a familiar certainly to familiar to our listeners that people are not just separate on the way they view things but the way they view each other said that the Democrats are just wrong but that they’re evil and unpatriotic and then the same with that same with Republicans Democrats see them as as less moral than the majority of Democrats see them as less moral than other kinds of people in the country. Also in this is that 73 percent of the public disagree over basic facts. Debate David mentioned this earlier and so that both sides agree by about the same numbers that that we are in a situation where nobody can even agree on basic facts.


S11: And what I wondered was whether this is an issue if the goal of a president is to see an urgent need in the country come up with a plan for attacking it and then try and convince half the country that you’re right which is a a model of thinking about the presidency that George Reedy who worked for LBJ used to talk about doing. Is this something that we should seek to have presidents put at the top of their to do list. You know the fifth most important thing the tenth most important thing because there’s a when you look at it you could even see it as the gateway to all other conversations.


S9: You can’t. Or is it something that’s just not going to be solved. And therefore presidents should should operate in that world rather than trying to operate in a way that fixes that world. And so that’s what it made me think about.


S6: But the Pew report is makes interesting reading even if you don’t seek to engage on that question much chatter quickly is will too quickly one one is about a new york times story on blue versus red cities or blue versus red metro areas. It’s called Red and Blue economies are heading in sharply different directions very interesting piece in The Times looked at economic growth and the nature of the economic growth in different cities in the U.S. and found that I mean not unsurprisingly that mostly cities are blue bluer cities have more college degrees more diversity much higher real estate prices generally stronger economies redder cities are whiter they are more homogenous they the economic growth is still there tends to come from manufacturing jobs there’s a lot less job stability. Cost of living is cheaper and then there’s certain kinds of cities which looked like they should be blue but are red. So Provo Utah looks like if you look at it demographically it should be a blue city but it’s red because it probably because it has a large Mormon population. El Paso Texas looks like it should be red but it’s blue because probably because there’s a large Hispanic population. Really interesting story that’s worth a read about kind of the ways in which cities are different. Second quick chatter If you’re going to be in Brooklyn or you can be in Brooklyn on Monday night we’re doing a really fun Atlas Obscura event for our new book. We have a new book which is a updated edition. I’ve talked about our guide to the world’s hidden wonders. I’m going to do a night of trivia and the world’s wonders and taste some of the world’s most amazing foods. And it’s gonna be really fun. So go to the Bell House on Monday night and you can sign up for that at Atlas Obscura listeners. What a great set of chatters this week. Keep them coming and tweet them to us at at Slate gab fest and I want to talk about one that spruce far of our sent us is constant sender of really good listener chatters. This week he sent and sends an L.A. Times story about a scientist named Art Shapiro who’s a California scientist who has been counting the number of butterflies in California for forty seven years. He set out to do this for five years who’s going to count number of butterflies and a bunch of different spots in California. He just keeps doing it and keeps doing it keeps doing it. It’s a it’s an amazing profiled a person who is just incredibly dedicated and as a result has compiled this monstrous and super useful and terrifying data set about butterflies in California which are signal animals and sort of signal the threat of climate change and the changing nature of the weather and climate in California. So really moving profile also James Kelly sent us a tiny little thing building off of our discussion of war dogs. Last week the Texas. This is interesting. Texas just had a voter referendum which passed 93 to 7 that when police dogs and other police horses finish up their work they are no longer going to be classified as government property. And so that they can retire and live with their trainers until now they’ve been classified as government property and thus could be destroyed or sold or auctioned. And now they they can instead live out of retirement with the people of taking care of them. So that’s a nice thing that Texas did. Good for you Texas.


S2: That is our show for today the Gabfest is produced by Joslyn Frank a researcher is Bridget Dunlap. Gabriel Roth is editorial director June Thomas managing producer of Slate podcasts so many people helping Rosemary help me here in D.C. and Melissa Stephanie Coleman is helping Emily in Boston. John I don’t even know where you are. Maybe Alan dust in your veins is having dust in your veins. I’ll meet you in New York.


S22: So just flesh so many people helping that one’s helping come to our live show December 18th our conundrum show in Oakland California at the Fox Theater flaked complex life for tickets for Emily and John. I’m David Plotz. Thanks for listening. We’ll talk to you next week.


S6: Hello Slate Plus how are you. We got some business today we’re doing two things we’re to talk about college journalism and then I just have to come back to my own challenge to myself I will be reciting where the wild things are I have not thought about that myself but no hell no no no I said I wasn’t going to and I didn’t. I mean I’m a truth truthful honest person like what is in there what is in the cavernous recesses of the plot brain that is ever cheesier and wholly or every minute. But let’s start by talking about this interesting crisis in college journalism Emily do you want to set the table or I can set the table.


S12: Yeah. So there’ve been two controversies the last few weeks.


S14: The first one was at Harvard where Harvard journalists for the Crimson I believe that newspapers called they were doing a story about crimson columns. That’s what I a little dig they were doing a story about ice deportations right.


S3: It was a protest about ice.


S17: That was the protest a student protest of ice.


S18: And the journalists decided to call ICE for comment about the protest. Students at Harvard were furious about this said that this phone call this request for comment was going to put at harm potentially the student protesters and a whole bunch of student groups groups of students of color but also like the Harvard Democrats all are I think boycotting the Crimson right now in protest of this decision. So that is sort of exhibit A exhibit B is at Northwestern where Jeff Sessions was coming to speak. Students protested his talk. They came in through a back entrance. They were kind of tussling their way to get in. There was a student reporter who was there taking pictures and then after the protest. Student journalists used social media and the phonebook to find contact information for some of the protesters and call them for comment. There was an uproar among the student protesters objecting to these basic tactics of journalism the students the journalists at the Daily Northwestern then issued an abject apology saying that they hadn’t been recorded saying that they hadn’t paid enough attention to the safety and well-being of their fellow students. They were really sorry. And then the dean of the journalism school wrote I think a very I think I as a professional journalist I think lots of professional journalists were relieved to see him appear on the scene to say you know look journalists should always be thinking about the way they go about doing their job and making sure that they are not causing discomfort to people if they can avoid it like they shouldn’t be rude they shouldn’t be up in your face if there’s another way to do it. But the Dean was essentially defending the premise of using the phone book of taking pictures of recording events which there was no other paper of record there to do that kind of reporting you know for me looking at all of this. I feel protective of the student journalists. I feel bad for these kids at Northwestern who are sort of in Whiplash mode like they were taking it from these lefty protesters and now they’re taking it on Twitter from all these professional journalists who are accusing them of kind of selling out the basic ethos of the profession. I also don’t really understand these claims that there is a threat to people’s safety from being reported on when they’re doing things in public.


S21: That said I do think that the fact that everything that student journalists produce goes right online and that the coverage of a student protest that would 20 years ago have been a kind of small internal failure at the school that does sort of change the whole valence of what student journalists do of what we all do. I’m not sure what to do about that.


S18: But I do understand that that shift has created a kind of different reality for what it means to publish student journalism. I’m just not again I’m not sure like what what you can recognize that. But I don’t then conclude that these stern journalists didn’t have the right and shouldn’t have been reporting on these events.


S9: The fact that we’re talking about this is proof of what you just said right. So the decisions made in what in theory is a kind of lower still supposed to be right a kind of lower stakes affair with student journalism you where you you you bump up against the line you cross the line you fumble you because you’re learning you’re just getting gear you’re just getting to your feet. That’s one thing. And so it did in a world now where this can be magnified. That has to be brought into account somehow. And then also you know I mean showing up at a protest now you can be targeted you know all the way up there. I mean you can be nationally targeted if you are if you are at a protest for whatever the cause. And maybe that has nothing to do with journalism. Maybe that’s the world we live in now. Because if the Crimson takes a photo graph of you Why is that different than if some other person takes a photograph of you and it just shows up in social media. I don’t know what to make of all of this.


S6: Well I think Emily your point that the kind of instantaneous archiving and the instantaneous availability of everything gets to this question we’ve talked about around things like mug shots and other forms of public record which were which exists the mug mug shots have always been public records that you could get and records of people’s divorces and records of people’s wills have always been public records.


S20: But suddenly when they are all online available you know with one two three clicks for no money or a relatively small amount of money it becomes they have a different valence and they they are there not invasions of privacy but they are put people’s lives in a color that they may not they may not be fair to them. And so we need to be very cautious. That said as I as a journalist and as a person who worked for The Harvard Crimson Harvard Crimson comport itself perfectly in this as far as I can tell absolutely perfectly. Like of course they should call us for comment. Of course they should. It’s their duty to to report on protest that occurs on the campus and to seek comment from the relevant organization being protested and to think that they wouldn’t is absurd and for the I mean I can you know anyone can boycott anyone they want if the Harvard Democrats and various groups want to boycott the Crimson more power to them I mean they’re just that’s perfectly within their rights. But to think that that was a failure of journalism is insane.


S14: So I don’t really get the objection to calling ICE like did the students who are protesting think that calling the story to ICE’s attention was going to. Yes I think that’s right. That somebody could get deported. Is that the OK. I think that if you’re protesting you’re already taking that risk.


S20: Right. Right. And the Crimson pointed out sorry John the Crimson pointed out they didn’t call it they didn’t notify ICE in advance that this protest was taking place. They called them after this protest had occurred to ask them about it. And this was a thing that occurred in a in a public forum was a public people speaking people you know appearing and walking in with their signs in a public space. So the idea that they then you know can’t be they can’t be named. They can’t be talked about they can’t be interviewed. And that ice couldn’t be told too that this protest occurred is crazy.


S11: Right.


S9: It doesn’t seem to be the answer to the totally reasonable point Emily made which is how do you how do we all from whether you’re attending a protest or whether you’re taking in information about a protest or whether you are conveying a report about the protest either in words or pictures how do we handle the fact that we are now living in this world of instantaneous global fame if you get caught in the news cycle the wrong way. Whose responsibility that is and whether it’s a shared responsibility and whether what the press role because everything you say is right David and yet you could imagine some portion of press responsibility shifting or changing a little bit to accommodate what Emily talks about although I have no idea what that solution is.


S13: Yeah I mean other thing that I don’t quite understand about this is that because of social media all people’s images and names are whipping all over the place regardless of what the college or any press is doing. And so I’m just I don’t completely understand the heightened sensitivity to journalism at this moment in which there’s just so much exposure and dissemination of information.


S3: No one. Well one other. Go ahead. I think that’s a really fair point. When I think about what the solutions are there no I can’t think of any kind of categorical solutions. But I come back to the same thing that I come back to over and over again on the show which is a mindset set shift which is that we just have to learn to accept that people have messiness in their lives and particularly in their college and that we should welcome it. Like I hope these kids who who committed some disruptive act at the Jeff Sessions speech I hope that that is something that they’re able to celebrate. It’s not something that haunts them in a way that that is cruel that but that it’s something that they’ve done and and that we as people who might hire them who might you know who they might date one of our children would think like Oh yeah. This is a person who lived a nice vital life and maybe made made some mistakes in their youth as we did. And yes their mistakes unfortunately or fortunately are chronic or are chronicled for perpetuity because of the digital world we live in. But let’s remember that we all did the same shit too and just try to be forgiving of it but that it’s easier said than done right.


S21: As part of this that I’ve been thinking about is this idea that it’s wrong to contact someone when you find their number of our social media or in the phone book like they didn’t give it to you. It’s almost like the sort of journalistic form of an unwanted advance right. This isn’t overture that somebody it turns out the receiver doesn’t want but there’s no way to know that right. I mean I find cold calls as a journalist I find making cold calls really hard. I’ve always found it really hard. I have done it for many years and our minds confirmations and I was actually doing it quite a bit in the last couple of weeks. And it’s you just have no idea how what the person’s reaction is going to be. And there’s something really uncomfortable about that like I don’t like to be intrusive I don’t want to feel like I am violating people’s privacy in some way. But sometimes that phone call yields someone on the other end who is not just willing but like eager to talk to you and is so glad that you called them and has something to say and cares about telling their story.


S15: And there’s simply no way to know until you get in touch with that right. And it goes when it goes badly. I always feel so terrible. Like how could I have ever thought that was a good idea.


S9: But then when it goes well when you think like OK I’m just doing my job and this is how it works directly along these lines Kevin Van Vulcan Berg who is at ESPN wrote a thread on Twitter which is fantastic and everybody should read about just exactly this thing when he was as we all were assigned a story early in his career about a young teenage girl who died by suicide and and then I’ll just won’t ruin it but read the read the thread it’s Kevin Van Vulcan Berg which is Kay Van Vulcan Berg on Twitter making precisely the point or showing precisely the point that Emily was just articulating.


S3: Yeah that was an awesome thread. All right. Okay well you hear we’re all right. So can I. Can I try my Where the Wild Things Are. Yeah. Well go for it. Okay. The night Max wore his wolf suit and made mischief of one kind and another his mother called him WILD THING AND Max said I’LL EAT YOU UP so she sent him to bed without any supper.


S23: That very night in Max’s groom a forest grew and grew and grew.


S24: And his ceiling hung with vines and the walls his walls became the world all around. And an ocean tumbled by with a private boat from Matt.
